name	party	age	constituency	forum	d.o.c	topic	ordinal	text
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-03-22	---	1	"This afternoon, the Dáil will vote on the Government's decision to lift the eviction ban in nine days' time. Every Deputy has a clear choice to make: to back a Government decision that will escalate the unprecedented housing emergency or to protect working families, single people and pensioners who, because of this decision, will lose the roof over their heads. I ask the Taoiseach again: where are people meant to go? Where are the 3,000 households whose eviction notices will kick in from 1 April meant to go? It is a question he dodges because he knows the answer. They have nowhere to go. Nothing the Government has announced in recent days changes that reality for people. Two weeks ago, the Government confirmed that it would remove the eviction ban with no plan in place. Then it cobbled together a list of previously announced measures. Then it changed tack again, hastily adopting other measures simply to get votes. The Government is scrambling all over the place but remains unable to answer the one fundamental question: where are people to go in nine days' time?The Taoiseach has heard the stories of those who will be evicted as result of the Government's decision - the woman with stage 4 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD, on constant oxygen, the mother going through chemotherapy and the family who will lose their home of 15 years and who have found nowhere else despite searching for months. The Government should therefore be in no doubt but that its decision and the vote today will have real consequences for real people. On the Government's watch, we have the most serious housing emergency in the history of the State. Nearly 12,000 people are homeless. More than 3,000 of our children are growing up in emergency accommodation and, now, because of the Government's decision to lift the eviction ban, 3,000 more households are looking that harrowing experience in the eye.The Taoiseach says that nothing would change in the time an extension to the eviction ban would buy. That, in reality, is the Government admitting that it will not tackle the housing emergency with the urgency it requires. The Government is conceding that it is out of ideas and that it has thrown in the towel. The policies of Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil created and deepened this crisis. Tens of thousands are trapped in a private rental nightmare, living with crushing insecurity and with no hope of getting a deposit together and no real chance to buy their own place. They are a generation locked out of home ownership by the failures of government. People have lived with this crisis for far too long. They have had enough of the excuses. They know that housing can be fixed, but it will not be fixed by a tired, jaded Government that has thrown in the towel.Tá mé ag impí ar gach Teachta Dála tacaíocht a thabhairt do rún Shinn Féin an cosc ar dhíshealbhú a shíneadh amach go dtí mí Eanáir na bliana seo chugainn. Caithfidh an Rialtas an t-am seo a úsáid le dul i ngleic leis na fadhbanna tithíochta a dhéanfadh difríocht cheart. By lifting the eviction ban, the Government and those who back it are choosing to escalate a housing crisis that is already out of control. They are choosing to make people homeless. I appeal to every Deputy to stand with Ireland's renters and to face down this horrendous decision. I ask the Taoiseach again to do the right thing: to reverse this cruel decision and extend the eviction ban.The Taoiseach's Government came to office telling us that it was the Government that would sort out housing, but nothing changed; in fact, matters worsened. Deputy Varadkar came into office as Taoiseach last December. He said he would be the Taoiseach to sort this out, but nothing changed; in fact, matters worsened. There is no urgency and no ambition, only dithering and failure. However, the Government's determination to end the eviction ban and its insistence that it happen now, its urgency on this matter, stands in very marked contrast to the sluggish, incoherent, piecemeal, failed Government approach to actually solving homelessness. The Government's failure to provide affordable housing, its failure to cut rents, its failure to give working families a chance and its biggest failure of all, to give our young people a fair shot, on these matters there is delay, delay, delay in its approach. However, when it comes to the 3,000 households now facing the loss of their homes come April, there is no delay. The message to them is: ""You are on your"" own, with nowhere to go. Those are the facts. I call on the Taoiseach to reverse this decision and to extend the eviction ban.Extend the eviction ban.Where do they go?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-03-21	---	1	The Government plans to lift the eviction ban in ten days. If it does this, where are the working families, single people and pensioners at risk of losing their homes meant to go? This question has been put to the Taoiseach repeatedly and those people still wait for an answer. Without putting any measures in place, the Government intends to remove this protection for renters during an unprecedented housing emergency. Homes to rent are at an all-time low, rents are at an all-time high, housing supply is too slow and housing prices are through the roof. We have record homelessness and emergency accommodation in many areas is full. Now, the Government's decision to lift the eviction ban throws renters to the wolves. We are talking about people who work hard, pay for everything and do all the right things to build a decent future. We are talking about tens of thousands of people trapped in the rental market who, in another generation, would have had the opportunity to buy a home of their own. This is a nightmare for renters who have been hit with an eviction notice. Thousands more are terrified of that call from their landlord with the news that they must leave their home. One family in Wicklow, including two children, have received an eviction notice. They have lived in their rented home for 11 years. They are now considering renting storage units and living out of a car.By lifting the eviction ban, the Government makes the political choice to escalate a housing emergency that was already out of control, and it is working people who pay the price. To be clear, the eviction ban is not a permanent solution. What it does is buy time for the Government to deal with the underlying issues. The Taoiseach says he is worried about landlords exiting the market. Then, give local authorities the clear instruction and financial firepower they need to buy those houses to keep tenants in their homes and expand the scheme to cover those not on the social housing list. Approved housing bodies are ready to act. We have thousands of vacant homes but the Government is too slow in bringing them back into use. We need pace. The Government must streamline the process and remove the stifling bureaucracy involved.We know that new technologies present the way forward for housing construction. Where is the initiative from the Government to harness these technologies? Where is the ambition? Ultimately, we need the biggest housing programme in the history the State and the delivery of genuinely affordable homes to rent or buy. Ireland is a great country. Our people are up and at it and our economy is strong. There is scope within the public finances for a transformative housing plan. What we need is a Government with the ambition to get the job done.Nuair a ardaíonn an Rialtas an cosc ar dhíshealbhú ar 1 Aibreán, cá bhfuil sé i gceist ag daoine dul? Caithfidh an Rialtas an cinneadh a chur ar ceal. Ní mór an cosc ar dhíshealbhú a shíneadh amach go dtí deireadh na bliana.Sinn Féin’s motion tonight calls on the Government to reverse its decision and extend the eviction ban. I ask every Deputy to think very carefully about the renters in their constituency and protect them by voting in favour of this motion.Should the Government proceed with this cruel decision, my question still stands: where are those people facing eviction from 1 April meant to go?When Deputy Varadkar re-entered the office of Taoiseach in December he said housing would be his priority. Now his first major housing decision is to put thousands of renters at risk of losing their homes. With his eyes wide open, the Taoiseach intends to lift the eviction ban knowing that it will spell disaster for so many. It will mean people losing their homes.It will mean some looking for homeless emergency accommodation that is not there. For others, it will mean sofa-surfing or moving back into the box room of their parents' home with their children in tow. Either-or, we are looking at a tsunami of misery again visited on our people. Now, the Government cobbles together measures or reiterates schemes that are not working efficiently or to scale as some kind of appropriate response. It is not.The Taoiseach sounds to me like somebody who has thrown in the towel and thrown renters to the wolves. He does not actually believe these things can be solved, but they can.To protect renters, we need an extension of the eviction ban and we need Government pace and ambition. As a matter of fact, we need a new Government.That much is evidently clear.No, it will not. Continuing in Government will make the situation worse.Do your work.It is sitting on its hands.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-03-08	---	1	Yesterday, the Taoiseach defended to the hilt the Government decision to scrap the eviction ban at the end of this month. Not alone is this a cruel decision but it shows once again that the Government is not on the side of hard-pressed renters. The Government has chosen to drop this protection for tenants in the middle of an unprecedented housing emergency. I want to emphasise that small landlords are not responsible for this crisis, the Government is. Essentially, the Government had a choice between wealthy investment funds and corporate landlords and the needs of ordinary people. True to form, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil show up for the landlords and the investment funds. The Government scrapped the eviction ban without any measures to protect renters from losing their homes. The Taoiseach and the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, talk about protections for renters into the future but with no clarity at all. However, this is happening now. In the coming weeks and months, many will be hit with eviction notices. We are talking about working families - people who work very, very hard. They pay their taxes. They pay for everything. Many are trying to save for a deposit. They do all the right things to keep the show on the road and to build a decent life for themselves and their children. Yet, without a thought for them, the Government removed a protection that gave some degree of security, as the housing crisis swirls all around them. The fear, stress and insecurity that this creates for those caught in the private rental trap are enormous. Those fears and worries are compounded by a Government scrambling about with no real plan, no urgency or no ambition to tackle the housing emergency to the scale required.Renters were already at breaking point, struggling to keep up with extortionate rents and looking at house prices that were simply beyond their reach. The Government's decision to scrap the eviction ban creates a nightmare scenario for them. What are the choices for any renter now served with an eviction notice? Do they join the long queues that wind around corners in a desperate search for one of the very few places available? Do they return to the box room of their parents' home? Do they couch surf? Many will choose to emigrate simply to escape this nightmare. The reason people are in this situation is because successive Governments have failed to deliver affordable housing to rent or buy on the scale demanded by this emergency. The Government has thrown in the towel on renters. Sinn Féin will be pushing for a Dáil vote on this matter at the earliest possible opportunity because the stakes are so high for renters everywhere.Is gníomh místuama é an cinneadh chun an cosc ar díshealbhú a scriosadh. Tá sé seo déanta ag an Rialtas gan aon chosaint bhreise a thabhairt do chíosóirí. Cruthaíonn sé cásanna tubaisteacha i gcomhar go leor teaghlach agus oibrithe a d'fhéadfadh a dtithe a chailleadh sna seachtainí agus sna míonna romhainn.My questions for the Taoiseach are as follows. What does he say to those working families who may receive an eviction notice in the coming weeks? Where are they to go? Could he please outline clearly what protections for renters the Government proposes? What are they and when will they be put in place?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-03-08	---	2	Jesus, Mary and Joseph.There is no one shouting you down, Leo. Relax.Yes.Thank you, a Cheann Comhairle. That is excellent. That was very well said. The only false narrative being spun here is that the housing emergency is the fault of landlords. Let me scotch that. It is not. Responsibility for this emergency lies fairly and squarely at the feet of the Taoiseach and his Government.That is the narrative. The choice here is between having a roof over your head or not; having rent that you can afford or not; having a Government that will stand up and defend renters or not; having a Government with the basic intelligence and cop-on to know that one does not create more uncertainty for renters at a time when supply is that tight and rents are so high and people are to the pin of their collar.People are afraid now. There are working families who are afraid of what lies ahead. I asked the Taoiseach to state very clearly what a family should do, in the coming weeks and months, when they get a notice to quit and when they are evicted. Where does that working family go? I would like the Taoiseach to answer that question.If you believe that, stand aside, call an election and let us get on with the job.We have plenty of proposals.Stop it.Stop it. This is a serious issue for families who will face eviction.Sorry, a Cheann Comhairle, the Taoiseach made a point of order and questioned the democratic capacities or ability of this party. I might remind the Taoiseach that on the last occasion that we went to the polls, this party and these benches secured more votes than his own.We are perfectly entitled to represent the people we represent----------and to do so robustly. That is at the heart of democratic debate.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-03-08	---	3	Cyra Cahill is three years old and is in need of services. Her mother, Charlotte, has spoken out publicly about her because she is desperate to secure those services. Cyra had an assessment of needs last year but there was no psychologist present. As the Taoiseach is aware, the HSE approach to assessment of needs was ruled by the High Court last year to be in breach of the Disability Act 2005. This means the assessment received by Cyra was invalid and she has been put back on the waiting list. Cyra and her mother have been told her assessment of needs will not be completed until 2024. I cannot overstate the desperate state of this child and her mother.Of course, Cyra is not on her own. More than 4,500 children are currently awaiting assessment. The HSE is legally obliged to provide that assessment within six months, but the average waiting time is 16 months, with many waiting much longer.What can the Taoiseach say to Cyra? When will the Government fulfil the legal obligation to these children and ensure that they get their assessments within the prescribed timeframe?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-02-28	---	1	The announcement yesterday of agreement by the European Commission and the British Government on the protocol is very welcome. It marks the end of negotiations to resolve trading practicalities. We always said that a workable and durable solution existed if both parties engaged in good faith and the necessary political will was demonstrated. The protocol represents hard-won protections for Ireland against the sharpest edge of the Tory Brexit. This means guaranteeing no hard border on the island of Ireland, protecting the Good Friday Agreement in its entirety and maintaining the all-island economy and access to the European Single Market. While all parties and sectors are now working through the detail of the agreement, it appears that these vital protections have indeed been preserved. We will, of course, be seeking clarifications on certain aspects of the agreement and I ask the Taoiseach to facilitate at least some of that process with all parties. However, it looks as though a positive outcome has been achieved for all of Ireland - for our people, our peace, our stability and our economic success. We are now at a turning point and that is very good news for business and wider society.I wish to recognise the unified stance taken by the Oireachtas on Brexit and in defence of the protocol through these very difficult years. Such a unified stance and a shared purpose is again required to see the democratic institutions in the North restored with urgency. We also need to see the resumption of the North-South Ministerial Council. Last May, the people voted in an historic Assembly election. They voted for an Executive of progress, partnership and inclusion. For nine months, however, the Democratic Unionist Party, DUP, has used the pretext of the protocol for its blockade of the Executive and the assembly. Following yesterday's announcement, there exists no justification, even by its own logic, for the DUP to continue this reckless and damaging boycott of democracy. There is no justification for the DUP to keep the Executive down while workers, families and businesses struggle with an unprecedented cost-of-living crisis and as they suffer from chronic treatment waiting lists. The vast majority of people in the North want the parties around the Executive table. They want a government up and working for them, dealing with the issues that affect their lives. The onus now is very much on the DUP to join with everyone else in making politics work. The negotiations are over and we need to see the restoration of the Executive without further delay.Tá fáilte mhór roimh an gcomhaontú idir an Coimisiún Eorpach agus Rialtas na Breataine ar an bprótacal. Déileálann sé leis an trádáil phraiticiúil. Caithfidh an DUP deireadh a chur lena bhac ar an bhFeidhmeannas anois díreach. Tá Rialtas a bhíonn ag obair ar son na ndaoine tuillte ag muintir an Tuaiscirt.I am sure the Taoiseach will join with me in welcoming on the floor of the Dáil the agreement struck between the European Commission and the British Government. I am sure he will join with me in welcoming the preservation of the hard-won protections for Ireland contained in the protocol. I am sure that, like me, he is frustrated by the continued absence of government in the North. Will he urge the DUP to end its blockade of the Executive, get back around the ministerial table and join with other parties to deliver a Government for all the people of the North?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-02-28	---	2	I thank the Taoiseach for that. There is no doubt but that the certainty and progress of which he speaks is desired by all of us and, most particularly, by people in the North. It is fair also to say that Europe listened to the concerns that were raised, as it made clear it always would, and agreement and a deal have been struck.Let us reflect, however, on the fact that the biggest concern for people in the North is that they have government. The biggest concern is that we have an Executive and a functioning Assembly nine months after a democratic election. There is now, I am sure the Taoiseach will agree, no logic for the DUP to continue its blockade. The negotiations are over. The deal has been struck. Yes, we need to pore over the fine detail of that, but I am sure the Taoiseach will agree that we can do that work with a functioning Assembly and an Executive in place. There is now no room for further delay or prevarication. Nine months on, people in the North need their Government up and functioning. Will the Taoiseach join with me in calling on the DUP to make that happen without further delay?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-02-22	---	1	Today, the Government wants to pass through the Dáil legislation establishing the mother and baby homes redress scheme, this despite the fact the scheme shamefully excludes children who spent less than six months in a mother and baby institution or a county home. As a consequence, 24,000 survivors will be left behind by the Government’s proposed scheme.It is scandalous that this exclusionary, discriminatory provision remains in the legislation. The scheme creates a hierarchy of victims by taking the view that some mothers and their children suffered less than others. The very idea that a child who spent less than six months in a home suffered no damage or injury and is not entitled to redress is just unacceptable. The Government is saying that these children did not spend long enough in a home to suffer trauma from being forcibly separated from their mother. That is wrong. For a child taken from their mother against her will, the trauma was and is the act of separation itself - a trauma that lasts a lifetime.This happened on the watch of the State and there must be redress for that injustice. The proposed scheme is a botched scheme. It does not meet the needs of survivors in an equal and fair way. It is not just Sinn Féin saying this; concerns have been raised by the Special Rapporteur on Child Protection, by the UN Special Rapporteur and by the UN Human Rights Committee.No matter how long a child spent in one of these places and no matter what age they were when they left, they suffered greatly and their trauma is real. No arbitrary six-month line drawn by the Government changes this reality. Is mór an náire é scéim an Rialtais. Is iomaí duine a tháinig slán ó na hárais mháithreacha agus naíonán atá fágtha amach ón gcúiteamh. Ní mór an scéim a athrú ionas go mbeidh gach marthanóir san áireamh. Is é seo an rud ceart a dhéanamh. The survivors of mother and baby homes have shown remarkable resilience and dignity in the face of great adversity. If it was not for their courage and bravery, there would have been no commission of investigation, no State apology and no redress scheme whatsoever to speak of. The scheme that comes before the House today is an insult to those survivors and the hard road they have walked. They have walked that road together. They have not separated or divided. They have not left anybody behind, and they will not allow the Government to do so now.This week we heard from many survivors on the radio. We heard from Jean and Eamon. They both spent less than six months in a home and they say this scheme makes them feel irrelevant. More importantly, it suggests that their separation from their mother did not matter. That is the human impact of this legislation. The Opposition has engaged in good faith in order to try to get the changes needed for a redress scheme that is just, but the Minister is not listening. Somebody needs to listen now and that somebody must be the Taoiseach. I ask him, as Head of Government, to intervene and drop this discriminatory six-month rule. I ask him to bring forward a scheme that truly meets the needs of survivors in a fair and equal way. These women and their families have had to fight the State every step of the way; they should not have to fight any longer.I am sure the Taoiseach is aware the Government's survivor consultation, which was extensive, reported there were numerous and many harms and human rights violations identified in respect of which reparation is needed. However, the consultation recorded the primary harm was the loss of the mother-child bond and the relationship. The primary damage was done by separation, yet, in an arbitrary way, the Government has decided those who were separated from their mother, if they happened to be in an institution for less than six months, are not to be covered by this redress scheme. I put it to the Taoiseach that this is actually cruel. The Government does not have to do this. If I were sitting where the Taoiseach is, I certainly would not do this for the very simple reason that it is wrong. God knows over the years we have heard testimony and heartbreak aplenty from families who were devastated by this experience. I again ask the Taoiseach to intervene in respect of this matter and to drop this arbitrary and cruel rule.It is arbitrary.And none of that justifies excluding them from redress.Wow.And none of that justifies excluding people from redress.It is heartless, it is cruel and it is disgraceful.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	debate	2023-02-22	---	2	I entirely agree with the Ceann Comhairle and I believe it is very important that we have a unity of purpose on this matter.I have not seen the wording of the motion. I anticipate that we can find words that accommodate the vast majority, if not all, Deputies. However, if this is a serious matter, worthy of effort not to split the House, why this sudden rush for today? As Deputy Bacik correctly said, tomorrow is in fact closer to the awful anniversary of Putin's criminal invasion. Surely we are entitled to time to digest and consider the motion and to prepare our remarks, if this is to be a serious effort by the House and not simply box ticking, which I would find most regrettable. I suggest to the Taoiseach, now that we have the motion, that we should take the matter tomorrow and give people sufficient and adequate time to prepare. It is only reasonable, I would have thought, and it is an orderly way for the Government to do its business.For clarity, how is it this matter was not raised on the Order of Business yesterday?This is a different type of intervention and it is not the way to do business. Every Member in this House deserves notice and the respect to get the adequate work done in order that this is a serious and appropriate reflection and joint enterprise on this awful anniversary of the slaughter and mayhem the Ukrainian people face.Fair------The Government should table it tomorrow.The Government should have announced that yesterday.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-02-22	---	3	On two occasions here today, the Taoiseach has been given the opportunity to give the explanation for the exclusion of children who spent less than six months in a mother and baby home or a county home from the redress scheme, and on two occasions the Taoiseach has failed to set out very clearly why that decision has been made. He said it is not a matter of cost containment. We will take him on his word on that. Will he set out, in clear language, why it is that the Government is proceeding in this way and insisting on the exclusion of these survivors from the redress scheme? It would be really helpful if the Taoiseach did not read a precooked scripted response.I would like to know his understanding and his justification, as Head of Government, for this approach.Give us your view.You have not.Just for the record,----------that is a non-explanation because you cannot defend this. You cannot stand over this.That is the truth.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-02-21	---	1	The Government has now signed off on its cost-of-living package. Sinn Féin has argued strongly for a spring bonus and we welcome these additional support payments to protect vulnerable people. High energy costs, food prices and increases to come in fuel costs will mean workers and families will remain under pressure.For the life of me, I cannot understand how the three men leading Government, after spending two months in talks, could produce a package which is silent on housing. We know that extortionate housing costs are at the very heart of this crisis and yet there is nothing here for renters. These are workers and families who are fleeced by hike after hike, paying out the lion's share of their income on rent. There is nothing here for mortgage holders either. Battered by a barrage of interest rate increases, they are forced to pay hundreds of euro more in mortgage repayments and there is still more to come. The pressure is enormous.Many renters and mortgage holders are wondering how much more they can take and are hanging on by a thread and yet, it seems, they did not even cross the Government's mind, when it put this package together.So many of our young people are forced out of Ireland because they cannot afford a roof over their heads. They have lost hope of a good life at home because Government consistently fails to see the bigger picture on the issues affecting their lives. They watch the Government fiddle around the edges but never showing any real ambition to fix housing.Over the weekend I spoke to one heartbroken mother whose three sons are bound for Australia. They all have good qualifications and good jobs but the extortionate cost of housing means they have no chance of building a decent future here so they have decided to go. Like so many who have already left, they worry that they will not have the chance to come back home. It is the job of the Government to fix that. Today we discuss the cost of living but we also need to talk about the cost of leaving. The cost of our young people leaving Ireland because of the housing emergency is massive. The cost and damage to society, our economy, our competitiveness, to families and to communities is a cost we cannot afford. This generation which is being forced out is brimming with talent, education, ideas but they need a Government with the determination and courage to do the big things so they can have a shot at the life they deserve. Tugann an pacáiste costais mhaireachtála a d'fhógair an Rialtas inniu neamhaird ar na costais tithíochta tubaisteacha agus tá easpa gníomhaithe ar chíosanna agus ar mhorgáistí. Níl rud ar bith don ghlún a ruaigeadh as an tír de bharr géarchéim tithíochta atá ag éirí níos measa.In order really to get to grips with the cost of living, the Government has to deal with the extortionate cost of housing. I asked the Taoiseach last week to do three things that would help turn the tide. I am asking him again today to do these things, namely: introduce legislation to ban rent increases for three years as a matter of urgency and cut rents by putting a month's rent back into renters' pockets by means of a refundable tax credit; introduce targeted, time-bound mortgage relief to support struggling homeowners; and for those families and workers - they are many - who are terrified that they will lose their rented homes, extend the eviction ban until the end of the year.It beggars belief that the Government would produce a package that completely ignores the fact that rents are still out of control. Rents should not be rising by even a percentage point; they need to come down. That is not going to happen automatically; it will require the Government to take action. In the context of people paying mortgages, some of whom have been thrown to the wolves - or to the vultures, I should say - and are getting rightly screwed by the relevant institutions, the Government has given no comfort or support whatsoever. It is not sufficient for the Taoiseach to say that this is not a budget. He stated very clearly that there would be a cost-of-living package. He also stated that he is aware, since becoming back as Taoiseach, that we have a housing emergency and that this would be his top priority. He could have fooled the renters and mortgage holders of Ireland because that is not what the Government's package says.I again ask the Taoiseach to include renters and mortgage holders in this package and to add to the measures he has announced today. I ask him to give relief to renters, mortgage holders and, in particular, those who now fear that as the eviction ban comes to an end, they may lose the roof over their heads.No, it is not.What are people paying in Castleknock? They are paying €4,000 in Cabra.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-02-15	---	1	Yesterday, I raised the matter of the patient safety Bill with the Taoiseach. I record that the 221+ group, working with the Minister for Health, alongside my colleague, Deputy Cullinane, and Deputy Kelly, have agreed an appropriate wording for an amendment to that Bill. I commend and thank all of them for that work. It has been most constructive and very much welcomed by the 221+ group.The cost-of-living crisis is impacting on households. People struggle to keep up with soaring bills across the board. Many people, three in five, according to a report from Deloitte, have no money left at the end of the month. People are now very worried about the months ahead. Times are especially hard for those on low pay whose wages have been outstripped by soaring costs. A report published by the Mandate trade union today presents the stark reality faced by many working in the retail sector. We see two thirds of retail workers earn less than €450 a week and only 20% of them earn more than €500 a week. The main reason for this is that many workers are not able to get the hours they need to make a decent living. Sharp practice by some employers denies additional hours to workers when they become available, forcing many close to the breadline.We are living through the biggest squeeze on household incomes in 40 years. Rents are through the roof, mortgage repayments are soaring, energy bills are out of control, grocery bills are increasing sharply and childcare fees are sky high. How can someone on a low or middle income get by? The answer is with very great difficulty. Many are on the brink. I spoke to one retail worker this morning who told me about the stress and pressure that she is under. Here is what she told me:I work hard but I just don’t get the hours I need to live with any security. Things were bad already, but we were just about getting by. Since the rise in living costs, I am having real trouble paying my bills. We’re really worried about being able to keep up the mortgage now. I don’t have a hope of putting any money away for a rainy day or if something goes wrong. The money isn’t there. I have colleagues - people who put in tough shifts - but they are now choosing between putting food on the table or paying the electricity bill. There is so much uncertainty and worry. It’s really tough going.Léiríonn tuarascáil Mandate go bhfuil oibrithe ar phá íseal faoi bhrú ollmhór de réir mar a leanann an ghéarchéim sa chostas maireachtála ar aghaidh. Ní mór don Rialtas pacáiste tacaíochta a thabhairt chun cinn chun an chinnteacht atá ag teastáil a thabhairt do theaghlaigh.The cost of living is devastating for people but just as it did last year, the Government is moving far too slowly in responding. Like last year, the Government is failing to give workers and families the clarity and certainty they need. In the last couple of weeks, the Government refused to back mortgage relief measures and refused to legislate to ban extortionate rent increases. When I asked the Taoiseach yesterday about extending the eviction ban, he came up blank. People are struggling now. They want to see a plan from the Government that will help them make it through the difficult months ahead. People are worried now. I ask the Taoiseach to give them the certainty they need today. I ask him to lay out clearly what actions his Government will take as the cost-of-living crisis continues to bite hard.I also acknowledge Nicola Sturgeon, who has been an outstanding leader and an outstanding advocate for the independence of her country. I have absolutely no doubt but that she will continue always to advocate for the country and the people she loves. Nicola, beir bua agus beannacht.The Taoiseach gave me a very studied non-answer to my question, unless he is contesting the reality that three in five people report that they have no money left at the end of the week, or unless he is contesting the fact that those on low and middle incomes are struggling badly and need answers from him now as to what he is prepared to do now, not retrospective self-praise, which, I remind him, is in the end no praise.I have asked the Taoiseach to set out specifics. People are struggling with the cost of their mortgages, they are struggling with the cost of their rents and their energy bills are now sky-high. As for groceries, it is widely reported that people are making choices between food on the table and the electricity bill. Will the Taoiseach please be more specific and set out in his view what needs to happen to support these struggling families?As am I.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-02-15	---	2	The District Court waiting times for domestic violence victims, as published by the  today, paint a shocking picture for victims of domestic abuse and coercive control. Of the eight courts with the longest waiting times, six have no refuge or safe accommodation provision in their counties.The Government speaks about an epidemic of domestic, sexual and gender-based violence but there is no urgency in its actions. We welcomed the third strategy but publishing a document alone will not prevent abuse or protect victims. We cannot wait for the establishment of the new agency to address the absence of safe accommodation in nine counties. Courts cannot prevent abuse if they do not have judges to hear the domestic violence cases. When will the heads of Bill for the new agency be published? Will safe accommodation be delivered this year for the counties currently without any refuge provision?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-02-14	---	1	Rents have soared to unaffordable levels in the decade that Fine Gael has been in power. The latest  report is a nightmare read for workers and families caught in the private rental trap. The report shows that new rents across the State increased by nearly 14% in 2022. All counties bar one saw double-digit increases. Some of these increases are frightening: County Mayo, up 21%; County Roscommon, up 20%; and County Galway, up 19.4%. The average rent now stands at a staggering €1,733 a month. Here, in Dublin, it is even worse, with tenants paying on average €2,293 per month. These are extortionate sums and there is worse to tell of. Apartments blocks are being built now where the asking rents will be even higher. Indeed, in my constituency there are three-bedroom apartments newly built where people are being asked to fork out nearly €4,000 a month in rent. That is €48,000 a year just for rent.Meanwhile, what people are being offered for their hard-earned money is beyond a joke: €625 per month for a bunk bed in a room with three other people, which is the one I am showing the Taoiseach; €1,880 per month for a room the size of a parking space where you pull your bed down, which is the one I am now showing the Taoiseach; and €1,100 per month for a bedroom, use of the kitchen and a utility room, but the rest of the house, which is in County Kildare, is off limits, which is the one I am now showing the Taoiseach. This is soul-destroying stuff.The rent crisis has had a devastating impact on the lives of an entire generation. People in their late 30s and 40s are stuck in house shares because they cannot afford to rent a place of their own. Young people are unable to move out of their parents' homes because they have not a chance of renting. So many are financially crippled by years of paying these rack-rents and are faced with the choice of moving back in with mam and dad or emigrating for their shot at a better life in another country. At the sharpest end of this crisis, thousands of families face losing the roof over their heads when the eviction ban expires in April. This is all happening because Government housing policy is failing.Week after week, Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael come in here and gaslight Ireland’s renters by telling them that their housing plan is working, but how they can make that claim to people who hand over the lion's share of their income on rent and who then see the rest of their income gobbled up by sky-high energy bills, childcare fees and grocery bills is beyond me.Renting in Ireland means your life and aspirations are on hold. You wonder when the next ripoff hike is going to happen or when the landlord might tell you to get out. It is no way to live.Léiríonn géarchéim na gcíosanna atá ag éirí níos measa teip polasaí tithíochta an Rialtais. Ní mór don Rialtas gníomhú anois chun cíosóirí a chosaint. Ciallaíonn sé sin cosc a chur ar arduithe cíosa agus cosc ar díbirt a shíneadh amach. Renters are now at breaking point and it is the job of the Government to protect them. I am asking the Taoiseach to do three things: first, to legislate urgently to ban rent increases for three years; second, to deliver a meaningful cut in rents by putting a month’s rent back to into tenants’ pocket through a refundable tax credit; and, third, to extend the ban on evictions until the end of the year.I have just set out what is the reality for so many people.This is now beyond crisis mode. People are paying €640 per month for a bunk bed sharing with three other people in a small bedroom. That is four people in one room. Where does this end? Where does this stop? At what point does reality dawn and do we see the necessary actions? The Taoiseach has set out what the Government has done under its plan, Housing for All. It is not working; ask any renter or anyone out there who lives in the real world and they will tell him the magnitude of his failure because they live it every single day.I put it to the Taoiseach again that he needs to do three things. First, he needs to effectively cut rent by putting a month's rent back in every renter's pocket by means of a refundable tax credit. Second, he needs to ensure there are no further rent hikes. The rent pressure zones are not delivering that at all. Third, and I would like him to address this point in particular, the eviction ban must be extended to the end of the year. If it is not extended, not alone will we have these still soaring, disgraceful, rack-rents, but we will have a further surge in homeless which would be an intolerable situation.It costs €4,000 to rent on Carnlough Road in Cabra. The Taoiseach needs to come off it. He needs to get a grip.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-02-08	---	1	First of all, I wish to record the shock felt across the world at the natural disaster and devastation we have witnessed in Türkiye and Syria. We extend our solidarity to all those hurt and injured and urge the global community to rally to the support of these devastated communities.Last Thursday the European Central Bank increased interest rates for the fifth time since July of last year. For the almost 200,000 households with a tracker mortgage this will result in an immediate and significant impact. The high-street banks, namely, Bank of Ireland and AIB, are starting to increase their rates. Vulture funds are increasing rates aggressively, which is leaving some paying interest rates of 7.5%. The net result of this is that tens of thousands of workers and families are paying hundreds of euro extra per month compared with this time last year. For those with even modest mortgages this can equate to thousands of euro extra per year.This is on top of a cost-of-living crisis that, mortgages aside, is putting real pressure on household finances. The cost of heating is up, the cost of filling the car is up and the cost of everyday shopping is up. The list goes on. For those whose mortgage bills are skyrocketing this is causing massive stress and anxiety. Is cúis mhór struis d’oibrithe agus do theaghlaigh é seo agus caithfimid rud éigin a dhéanamh anois. One person I spoke to this morning told me their annual mortgage payment has now increased by more than €3,000, and that is before the increase due next month.It is now time to introduce timely, targeted and temporary mortgage interest relief to support workers and families who are put to the pin of their collar. This evening we in Sinn Féin will bring a motion to the Dáil that provides a meaningful solution for households that have had to contend with five interest rate hikes in less than a year. Our proposal to reintroduce mortgage interest relief will be in place for 12 months to absorb a portion of borrowers’ increased interest costs. This relief would amount to 30% of the increased interest costs compared with June of last year, with a maximum benefit of €1,500.As with every measure to combat the cost-of-living crisis we appreciate the State cannot cover the entire cost but it can, and should, lend a helping hand. It should do this now; this is what is needed. The Government ruled out this approach out when my colleague, Teachta Doherty, put the proposal to it in December. Since then the situation has worsened, and worsened considerably. We now see tens of thousands of workers and families needing support. Will the Taoiseach support our proposal, and will mortgage interest relief be reintroduced without delay?I thank the Taoiseach. As he said, there are 186,000 borrowers on tracker mortgages, 129,000 on standard variable rates and more than 113,000 with non-banks and vulture funds. Some borrowers are being affected very dramatically and very immediately with these five hikes so far and with more to come. I do not believe the Government should hesitate on this matter.The reality, as we know, is that families and workers were struggling anyhow with a cost-of-living crisis. For lots of families, this has now, as they say, put the tin hat on things for them. We need to see Government intervention. I appeal to the Taoiseach not only to support our proposal and our motion this evening, but also to include targeted, time-bound mortgage interest relief as the package of measures that needs to be introduced now.Do not imagine for a second that we or the families who are struggling can wait for the next budget. That is completely unreal.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	debate	2023-02-02	---	1	. You are very welcome, Madam President. Ireland is a nation that stands proudly for the values of democracy, solidarity, equality and human dignity, for freedom. These are values shared and cherished by the peoples of Europe as we strive to shape a bright future for workers, families and communities in a rapidly changing world. They are of course the values that must drive, reform and recast the European project.I warmly welcome President Metsola today. She visits us when our togetherness and common purpose have never been more important. A year on, Europe remains unified, Ireland also, in our support for the people of Ukraine against Putin's criminal and barbaric invasion. Russia's illegal war and violation of human rights must be stopped and the journey to peace must begin. Putin must withdraw. The Ukrainian people know that they are not alone. They know that Ireland and Europe will stand with them as they continue their struggle for the liberation of their beloved homeland.Some 25 years ago, European solidarity was crucial in the success of our peace process and today Ireland is grateful for the unwavering support of our European partners in the face of Brexit. Europe has stood foursquare in defence of the protocol, hard-won protections for Ireland's peace, political stability and our all-Ireland economy. I acknowledge the repeated support of the European Parliament for the protocol and President Metsola's own staunch commitment, reiterated here today, to protect Ireland's interests in the midst of the Brexit storm. Sinn Féin supports the current talks between the European Union and Britain to make the protocol work better. We need pragmatic and durable solutions and we need them quickly. The people of the North of Ireland want stability and certainty. They want to see the Executive back up and running to deliver for them and their families under the leadership of our colleague, Ms Michelle O'Neill MLA, First Minister designate, who joins us today. We need to see an end to the DUP boycott of the political institutions in the North of Ireland. It has been reported that the mood music from the latest protocol talks is positive. That is most welcome. A fair and practical outcome to these negotiations must be delivered and the time for solutions is now.One of the surest ways of creating change in the world is by speaking honestly with our friends. It is time for the European Union and indeed the wider international community to act forcefully for peace in the Middle East, for an end to Israel's brutalisation of the Palestinians, for an end to the Israeli apartheid regime, a regime that sees annexation and illegal settlements, collective punishment, and the violent targeting of refugees and the dispossessed. In Israeli aggression, Palestinian reprisal, and innocent lives lost in Jenin refugee camp, in Gaza, in synagogues, we see the bitter fruit of the policies of a right-wing, hawkish government. President Metsola rightly reflected earlier on Ireland's colonial experience that shapes our world view. It is in that spirit that I say to her that it is wrong that Israel continues to enjoy a special partnership with the European Union while it tramples on the human rights of Palestinians--------and openly and repeatedly violates international law. If the European Union is a Union of values, of peace, then the EU must be to the fore in forming a global movement against Israeli apartheid in Palestine with the same international determination and momentum that defeated apartheid in South Africa three decades ago. Tá a fhios againn nuair a oibríonn muid le náisiúin an Aontais Eorpaigh go bhfuilimid chomh láidir agus is féidir. Bainfimid an rath is mó amach nuair a oibríonn an Eoraip mar fhórsa ar mhaithe leis an domhan chun saol an ghnáthdhuine a fheabhsú agus nuair a oibríonn muid mar chosantóir na síochána thar coimhlint.President Metsola visits at a time of great change in our country. Ireland has always had the support of our gallant allies in Europe. Europe has kept faith with Ireland and that friendship has meant so very much. We have now had 25 years of peace but we have more to do. Our country remains partitioned but as we walk the final length of our long journey to full nationhood and reunification, I ask our European partners to continue to walk with us. I for one look forward to the day when we see Ireland, our country, in the European Union as a nation united, looking confidently with our European friends to a better future for all our people.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	debate	2023-02-02	---	1	. You are very welcome, Madam President. Ireland is a nation that stands proudly for the values of democracy, solidarity, equality and human dignity, for freedom. These are values shared and cherished by the peoples of Europe as we strive to shape a bright future for workers, families and communities in a rapidly changing world. They are of course the values that must drive, reform and recast the European project.I warmly welcome President Metsola today. She visits us when our togetherness and common purpose have never been more important. A year on, Europe remains unified, Ireland also, in our support for the people of Ukraine against Putin's criminal and barbaric invasion. Russia's illegal war and violation of human rights must be stopped and the journey to peace must begin. Putin must withdraw. The Ukrainian people know that they are not alone. They know that Ireland and Europe will stand with them as they continue their struggle for the liberation of their beloved homeland.Some 25 years ago, European solidarity was crucial in the success of our peace process and today Ireland is grateful for the unwavering support of our European partners in the face of Brexit. Europe has stood foursquare in defence of the protocol, hard-won protections for Ireland's peace, political stability and our all-Ireland economy. I acknowledge the repeated support of the European Parliament for the protocol and President Metsola's own staunch commitment, reiterated here today, to protect Ireland's interests in the midst of the Brexit storm. Sinn Féin supports the current talks between the European Union and Britain to make the protocol work better. We need pragmatic and durable solutions and we need them quickly. The people of the North of Ireland want stability and certainty. They want to see the Executive back up and running to deliver for them and their families under the leadership of our colleague, Ms Michelle O'Neill MLA, First Minister designate, who joins us today. We need to see an end to the DUP boycott of the political institutions in the North of Ireland. It has been reported that the mood music from the latest protocol talks is positive. That is most welcome. A fair and practical outcome to these negotiations must be delivered and the time for solutions is now.One of the surest ways of creating change in the world is by speaking honestly with our friends. It is time for the European Union and indeed the wider international community to act forcefully for peace in the Middle East, for an end to Israel's brutalisation of the Palestinians, for an end to the Israeli apartheid regime, a regime that sees annexation and illegal settlements, collective punishment, and the violent targeting of refugees and the dispossessed. In Israeli aggression, Palestinian reprisal, and innocent lives lost in Jenin refugee camp, in Gaza, in synagogues, we see the bitter fruit of the policies of a right-wing, hawkish government. President Metsola rightly reflected earlier on Ireland's colonial experience that shapes our world view. It is in that spirit that I say to her that it is wrong that Israel continues to enjoy a special partnership with the European Union while it tramples on the human rights of Palestinians--------and openly and repeatedly violates international law. If the European Union is a Union of values, of peace, then the EU must be to the fore in forming a global movement against Israeli apartheid in Palestine with the same international determination and momentum that defeated apartheid in South Africa three decades ago. Tá a fhios againn nuair a oibríonn muid le náisiúin an Aontais Eorpaigh go bhfuilimid chomh láidir agus is féidir. Bainfimid an rath is mó amach nuair a oibríonn an Eoraip mar fhórsa ar mhaithe leis an domhan chun saol an ghnáthdhuine a fheabhsú agus nuair a oibríonn muid mar chosantóir na síochána thar coimhlint.President Metsola visits at a time of great change in our country. Ireland has always had the support of our gallant allies in Europe. Europe has kept faith with Ireland and that friendship has meant so very much. We have now had 25 years of peace but we have more to do. Our country remains partitioned but as we walk the final length of our long journey to full nationhood and reunification, I ask our European partners to continue to walk with us. I for one look forward to the day when we see Ireland, our country, in the European Union as a nation united, looking confidently with our European friends to a better future for all our people.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-02-01	---	1	"Hello to everyone from Ballymun in the Visitors Gallery.Yesterday he Taoiseach admitted to the Dáil that he was, in fact, briefed on Government legal strategy on nursing home charges. This was 24 hours after he stated that he was not involved in the strategy and sought to put distance between himself and it. Not only did he admit he was briefed and that his predecessors and successors in government were also briefed, but he also stated that he stands foursquare behind this plan, this strategy. His expressed view is that this was, and is, a good Government strategy - a heartless plan designed by Government to hardball elderly, vulnerable people and their families forced to pay nursing home charges they should not have been paying; a strategy to stop them getting their money back, to prevent them from vindicating their rights and to keep things quiet.Last night, we learned on RTÉ's ""Prime Time"" that another cold and heartless Government strategy was in place to remove allowances - the disability maintenance payment - from people with disabilities in residential care. This was a Government decision that was deemed to be unlawful. The documentation from 2009 shows that the Government of the day knew that these citizens were entitled to their allowance but used their vulnerability to prevent them from getting their payment.This was another political strategy put in place to stop ordinary people wronged by Government from taking their case to court. Why was this? The view of the Attorney General at the time was that the State would be unable to defend these cases successfully and so, another strategy to conceal, to deny, to cover up and to protect the Government instead of protecting vulnerable citizens. In fact, this secret document set out that a comprehensive trawl of all of those who had been illegally stripped of their disability maintenance payment should not be done because, it said, “such an exercise would be unlikely to escape media attention or speculation and could generate further claims which otherwise would not have been made”. Worse still, the Minister for Health of the day and, indeed, the entire Cabinet, endorsed this strategy. Of course, it was endorsed again by the 2011 Government, of which the Taoiseach was part, because it was reflected in the memo I discussed with him yesterday.The story of these Government strategies is a sordid tale of successive Governments involving Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael, the Labour Party and the late Progressive Democrats actively working against the interests of some of our most vulnerable citizens. Families were forced to use private nursing homes because of the failure of Government to provide places within the public system. These families were ripped off, with many forced to work into their 70s to just get by, in some cases on less than €30 a week. Now, we see a mirror image of this political strategy adopted by Government after Government against citizens with disabilities who are dependent on the State to look after them, to vindicate their rights and to protect them. These were citizens, many of whom lived in sheltered environments and who may not have had the capacity to initiate their claim. All of this has caused real hurt, real trauma and real hardship for many people; people who needed the Government to stand up for them instead of Governments facing them down and fighting them tooth and nail, at every turn, to deny them things they were entitled to. The human cost has been heavy and deep.Does the Taoiseach believe that this Government strategy set out in a memo from 2009, and used against people with disabilities, was a legitimate strategy for Government? Is that a legitimate Government strategy? Does the Taoiseach stand by that? Does he call this also a good plan and a good strategy from Government?Yesterday, the Taoiseach expressed incredulity at what was suggested. Here are his words so that I am not accused of misrepresenting or misquoting him.The allegation here is very clear. It is that four or five Governments, four or five Attorneys General, any number of Ministers and former Ministers, some of whom are now in the Government and some in the Opposition, and dozens of officials all conspired to deny people refunds they were entitled to. That is as far-fetched as it sounds. It is not what happened.However, it is exactly what happened.That is exactly what happened. It happened in respect of preventing those who had been illegally charged in nursing homes from going to court, having the matter adjudicated and getting their money back. It also happened in respect of these citizens who, by the way, were entitled to that allowance. It was illegal. It was judged to have been , illegal, for the State to deny those people that money. Again, the same strategy was used to keep it quiet, say nothing and not to raise the hare. The worst aspect of it is that government after government, knowing that the State had wronged and denied people things to which they were entitled, colluded and conspired in a strategy to ensure that people could not have their rights vindicated. Where is the compassion in that?Where is the care for people? Where is there evidence of a government standing up for people rather than facing them down----------many of them in the most vulnerable circumstances imaginable in society?The strategy was the same.The State settles before the case goes to trial.We cannot protect the past by attacking the vulnerable.The strategy is the same."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-02-01	---	2	"The Taoiseach and his Cabinet colleagues were advised in a secret memo in 2011 that the withholding of the disabled persons maintenance allowance from people with disabilities was illegal. In the words of the memo circulated to the Taoiseach and the Government, the regulations were ""plainly  and void"". The State had not, as the Taoiseach said, a leg to stand on and, therefore, a strategy was pursued to keep these matters under wraps and out of court. Given that the State did not have a leg to stand on and that the withholding of this allowance was illegal and wrong, why did the Taoiseach do nothing about that? How is it that, 12 years on, he continues to deny these vulnerable citizens what is rightfully due to them?The Taoiseach was briefed on it, though.The Taoiseach was briefed on it, was he not?It is all in the one memo."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-01-31	---	1	For more than 30 years, the State and successive governments have ripped off hundreds and thousands of elderly citizens and their families by unlawfully charging them for nursing home care. Despite consistent, repeated legal advice that those charges were illegal, the Government continued to force vulnerable people to pay up. This created real financial hardship and pushed many into poverty as they struggled to afford the charges.At the weekend, we discovered in the  that successive governments to this very day operate a secret, calculated legal strategy to stop those who are illegally charged from getting their money back. That was last night confirmed by a Government spokesperson. Instead of the State and the Government owning up to this horrendous treatment of elderly citizens, successive governments have pursued a heartless legal and political strategy, one designed by governments to draw out cases they knew they could not win, to exhaust people's ability to fund their legal challenges and then to settle for significantly reduced awards, all the while keeping things hush-hush. Governments did this knowing it would hit the least well-off families the hardest. We are talking about people forced to work beyond retirement to pay for their parents' nursing home fees. We are talking about pensioners left with a weekly pittance on which to live after paying the charges for loved ones' care. We are talking about families fearing they would go without food, clothes and the basic necessities after forking out these fees. Life savings and pensions have been wiped out, homes sold and elderly people pushed to the breadline, all in a desperate scramble to pay charges that were illegal and the Government knew to be illegal. Then there is the biggest scandal of all - a carefully designed, reviewed plan to prevent these people from getting their money back. That is the reality of this scandal, yet government after government persisted.The Taoiseach has claimed this is complex. There is nothing complex about the Government ripping off elderly people. There is nothing complex about devising a legal and political strategy to cover your tracks. The truth is that this heartless strategy has been agreed and renewed by every Government and Minister for Health, including the Taoiseach, up to the present day.Yesterday, the Taoiseach went on the radio. He claimed he was never party to devising or agreeing this legal strategy and tried to distance himself from it, but that is not true. A memo from 5 May 2016, also published, states clearly that the strategy was agreed and overseen by the Minister, which was the current Taoiseach. Is that not the case? Not alone did he know about it, but his colleagues, the Minister, Deputy Harris, the Minister, Deputy McEntee, and the now Tánaiste, Deputy Micheál Martin, knew about it. Let us not play games.Dúirt an Taoiseach nár aontaigh sé leis an straitéis seo. É sin ráite, is léir gur lean gach Aire Sláinte, le blianta beaga anuas, an Teachta Varadkar san áireamh, leis an straitéis seo chun bac a chur ar na daoine sin a gcuid airgid a fháil ar ais.Does the Taoiseach still claim he knew nothing of this strategy? Does he still claim that colleagues in government knew nothing of it? It is clear to me that all documentation and correspondence relating to this secret legal strategy must now be published. Will the Taoiseach commit to that?In fact the Taoiseach acted in bad faith, as did his colleagues, his predecessors and, it seems, his successors. The Taoiseach has confirmed to the House that he was wrong yesterday; that he knew about this strategy and that he had been briefed.Can he confirm that other members of the Government - the Ministers, Deputies Simon Harris and Helen McEntee, and the Tánaiste, Deputy Micheál Martin - were similarly aware of this strategy and were briefed?Will the Taoiseach also respond to my other question on the publication of all of the documentation surrounding these issues? These documents need to be published as a matter of urgency and publicly scrutinised.On the issue of who was briefed, were the Ministers, Deputies Harris and McEntee and the Tánaiste, Deputy Micheál Martin, briefed? Was anybody else briefed? Who did the initial memorandum go to in 2011? The Taoiseach stated yesterday that he believed it was to four people. Can he identify who they were and can he confirm that all documentation will, in fact, be published?There was no legal entitlement to charge.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-01-25	---	1	Workers and families are experiencing a really tough start to the new year. The post-Christmas period is always a time of financial pressure but the soaring cost of living sees households really up against it. People are due to be hit with massive energy bills as Government supports are swallowed up. Parents are finding it difficult to put food on the table as the price of groceries has skyrocketed and households continue to cut back on the basics just to get by. The cost-of-living crisis has not gone away. For many households, in fact, the situation is getting worse. People continue to make hard decisions just to make it to the end of the week. The Society of St. Vincent de Paul has said it has received the highest number of calls from families seeking help since the economic crash. The society is also providing record levels of support to students and young people. A poll conducted for Virgin TV News captures the reality of this crisis. The vast majority continue to stress about the impact of soaring costs on their lives. Many say they will not have enough to cover spending on essentials this month and more than a fifth say that their children have had to go without meals or clothing.Adding to the pressure, the ECB is set to hike interest rates for a fifth time next week. The hike will mean an immediate blow for those on tracker mortgages. The stream of hikes has left these households thousands of euro worse off. We know that those who had their mortgages sold to vulture funds are being aggressively exploited and battered by interest rate increases. Yet, even though there are more hikes to come, the Government refuses to bring forward any mortgage relief measures. People are genuinely worried about what is coming down the tracks as Government supports come to an end. When Sinn Féin public representatives are out in our communities, people constantly come to the door with their extortionate gas bills in hand and they are very worried about the next one. As things stand, at the end of February the reduced VAT rate for gas and electricity comes to an end as does the reduced rate of excise duty for petrol, diesel and home heating oil and the ban on energy disconnections. Four weeks later, the moratorium on evictions runs out. This presents the perfect storm waiting to happen for workers and families.The Government has said that it will meet in the coming weeks to discuss the future of cost-of-living supports but after two years of being hammered by soaring living costs, households need clarity and certainty about what is going to happen next. They need that clarity and certainty from the Taoiseach now. He has said there will be no cliff-edge but people need to see the plan. Tá an ghéarchéim sa chostas maireachtála ag cur daoine faoi bhrú dáiríre. Caithfidh an Rialtas a chinntiú go bhfaigheann teaghlaigh an tacaíocht a theastaíonn. Tá oibrithe agus teaghlaigh ar chiumhais na haille agus ní féidir leis sin tarlú.My questions are these. Will the Taoiseach provide struggling households today with certainty they need? Can he set out his plan? Will he commit to extending the supports and protections that are coming to an end? Will he please examine options to introduce targeted, tailored and time-bound mortgage interest relief for struggling mortgage holders?I thank the Taoiseach. Notwithstanding the measures the Government has taken, people are still struggling, as I have described. The Taoiseach has confirmed that he also recognises that. All along, we have said to the Taoiseach and his Government that the one-off measures that were introduced to assist people were, of course, welcomed by people. All help is good help when you are under pressure. What people really have needed and still need, however, is a sense of certainty and an ability to plan. They need to know where their household will be and how they will provide for themselves and their children at the end of next month and the month after that. While the Taoiseach's acknowledgement of the potential cliff edge is welcome, as is his assertion that there will be no cliff edge, we need more than that now. People need to see the colour of his money. They have to see the shape of the plan. I again ask whether the reduced VAT rate for gas and electricity will come to an end or whether the Government will continue it. Likewise, will the reduction in excise duty on petrol, diesel and home heating oil be continued? What about the moratorium on energy disconnections and the moratorium on evictions? People need that sense of a plan and certainty now.We heard all that before. People are still struggling.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-01-25	---	2	Coillte's proposed joint venture with a British investment fund must be stopped. The Taoiseach has stated that the Coillte deal was not the Government's preferred model. Of course, the Taoiseach has been aware since 2021 that Coillte was exploring such a joint venture. The Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Deputy Charlie McConalogue, confirmed that on 2 June 2022 a shareholder letter of expectation was issued to Coillte, directing it to develop initiatives precisely such as this joint venture. As the Taoiseach gave the green light for this approach I ask the Taoiseach now to put a stop to this outrageous proposal.Precisely.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-01-24	---	1	The controversy surrounding the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Donohoe's undisclosed election donations raises again Fine Gael's relationship with big business and its influence at the heart of Government. The whole saga carries the stench of cronyism and favours for insiders.The businessman at the centre of the controversy, Michael Stone, issued a statement today in which he revealed he gave a second undeclared donation to the Minister in the 2020 general election. This means the Minister failed not once but twice to disclose a donation in back-to-back elections from the same wealthy supporter. This is a supporter who has secured lucrative State contracts, was appointed to the powerful Land Development Agency by Fine Gael outside of the normal process and was appointed as chair of the north-east inner city programme implementation board. Mr. Stone has now resigned from both bodies. A theme of this controversy is the Minister’s ever-changing story, the muddying of waters and the ducking and diving to evade accountability. It has been an exercise in concealment and cover-up from start to finish.This morning we have it again. Mr. Stone claimed the Minister asked him twice if he had paid for his postering operation in the 2020 general election and that he told the Minister he had not. Then, in a eureka moment as the Minister was being questioned on the floor of the Dáil, Mr. Stone remembered that he had paid for the postering in 2020. This is the farcical story the Minister asks the Dáil and public to believe but nobody buys it. The reason Mr. Stone had a sudden recollection is he knew they were caught out. The idea that this donation slipped through the net and out of memory does not stack up. The idea the Minister did not know and the businessman forgot does not hold water. Are we seriously supposed to believe neither the Minister, his director or elections nor any member of his campaign team knew anything of who was putting up the election posters? The posters had to be ordered, delivered and their distribution planned. Mr. Stone’s vans were crisscrossing the constituency putting up the posters and taking them down. People had to know Mr. Stone was taking care of the postering, and the Minister had to know also.Tá sé seo an-dáiríre. Tá rud éigin aisteach faoi scéal an Aire, an Teachta Donohoe. Tá a chreidiúnacht i gcruachás. Caithfidh sé an fhírinne a insint. The Minister’s credibility lies in tatters. He has chosen concealment and cover-up again and again. At every turn, the truth has to be dragged out of him.He was informed about the nature of the 2016 donation in 2017 and he did nothing. He denied there was anything to see when he was questioned by the media last November. It was only when the Standards In Public Office Commission, SIPO, wrote to him that was he forced to respond. When he was asked about the 2020 election, he denied the involvement of Mr. Stone. Indeed, we would know nothing of the 2020 donation had i not been for questions being put to the Minister in the Dáil last week. The Minister misled the Dáil last week. Now, to continue the cover-up, Michael Stone has fallen on his sword, all to protect the Minister.Is the Taoiseach also standing by this story? Does he also claim that the Minister did not know and that the businessman simply forgot? As the head of the Government, does the Taoiseach stand by this account of events?Nice try. That is a nice try at a distraction. If the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform has a very faulty memory, then I have to say the Taoiseach is of Olympic-level competence in trying to breed further distractions. This is what has happened. Every rule in the book has been broken. Spending limits, I suspect, have been breached. Certainly, a corporate donation was made by somebody who was not registered as a corporate donor.But here is the rub: a very wealthy individual who is a beneficiary of State contracts and who is appointed to State boards is a donor to the then Minister for Finance. That is a matter of public interest, but the deliberate concealment of that, election after election, is a real cause for public worry. There is a need for accountability on this. The Taoiseach says the Minister will come before the House again, I imagine to spin the same cock-and-bull story he spun last week. I put it to the Taoiseach that it is not credible for him, on his own part, to attempt to stand over these donations that were undeclared and the cock-and-bull story his colleague has fabricated, after the fact, to try to cover his tracks.That has nothing to do with donations.Michael Stone did not pay for that, though, if that is your concern.You are.Michael Stone, under cover of darkness, stole Paschal's posters.Okay. Bang on.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	question	2023-01-18	---	1	Go raibh míle maith agat. Happy new year to one and all.Today, the Taoiseach takes his first Leaders’ Questions and his Cabinet is mired in scandal. The two Deputies at the centre of these scandals - the former Minister of State, Deputy English, and the current Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Donohoe - reportedly received a round of applause for their efforts at last night’s meeting of the Fine Gael Parliamentary Party. Last week, Deputy English was forced to resign as Minister of State because he lied on a housing planning application. Tens of thousands of people were not able to build a one-off home because, unlike Deputy English, they were honest in filling out their forms. However, he believed those rules did not apply to him.The Minister, Deputy Donohoe, is embroiled in controversy for flouting election donation rules. There has been a concerted attempt by the Minister to trivialise the matter as an administrative error but you and I know it is far more serious than that. The truth is that in the 2016 general election, the Minister received a political donation from a businessman which he failed to declare, and which was above the amount allowable by law. The businessman who provided the donation of a postering service, Michael Stone, at that time headed the Construction Industry Federation, the organisation that represents developers. Mr. Stone was subsequently appointed by Fine Gael to the Land Development Agency outside of the normal process. This demonstrates again how politics work in Ireland. There is a cosy club culture that sees Fine Gael Ministers slip seamlessly out of government and into roles as financial lobbyists, allows vulture funds to run amok, and sees housing policy written for big developers and corporate landlords. Despite his best efforts, the Minister, Deputy Donohoe, cannot escape the fact that he broke the rules by receiving this donation. That is why he failed to correct his election return when the matter was brought to his attention as long ago as 2017. It is why he tried to convince members of the media that there was nothing to see here when he was questioned in November. It is why it took the Standards in Public Office Commission, SIPO, writing to the Minister last Friday for him to respond.Since then, the Minister has concocted a story that has changed so many times that its credibility lies in tatters. The Minister first claimed that the posters were erected at night but images published by the  show workers - I can only assume employees of Mr. Stone’s - in their hard hats, using the company van to put up the Minister's posters in broad daylight, in the middle of their working day. Yet, the Minister, Deputy Donohoe, wants everyone to believe that this was not an unlawful political donation to him from a construction company. Nobody believes that story because it is not true.Bhris an tAire, an Teachta Donohoe, na rialacha nuair a fuair sé an síntiús seo. Tá a scéal dochreidte. Caithfidh sé an fhírinne a insint. This smacks of cronyism and of favours for insiders. It is time for the Minister to come clean.My questions are straightforward. What involvement has Mr. Stone had in any other Fine Gael election campaigns or in any other campaigns for the Minister, Deputy Donohoe? Can the Taoiseach explain why Mr. Stone was appointed by Fine Gael to the Land Development Agency outside of the normal processes? When did the Taoiseach first learn of this donation? Was it brought to his attention in November when the media first started asking questions? Does the Taoiseach accept that the Minister, Deputy Donohoe, broke the rules when he received this donation?I am not casting aspersions on anyone. I am simply asking the logical, reasonable questions that arise from the recent turn of events.The story as told by the Minister, Deputy Donohoe, lacks any credibility whatsoever. The facts, as they have been established so far, are that this businessman, Mr. Stone, made a donation to the election campaign of Paschal Donohoe. The fact is that this donation was not declared. It is also a fact that it was only years later, when confronted with the letter from SIPO, that the Minister moved to clarify any matter.I have asked the Taoiseach, as Head of Government and the leader of Fine Gael, what I think are reasonable questions. Has he asked the Minister, Deputy Donohoe, whether Mr. Stone had any involvement in any of his other election campaigns, including the 2020 election campaign? Did he assist with postering services then?What is the Taoiseach's view of a Minister that flouts rules and laws like these?Which was declared.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	54	Dublin Central	debate	2023-01-18	---	2	It is a farce.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-12-17	---	1	I begin by wishing Teachta Martin all the very best as he exits the Office of An Taoiseach and his role at Cabinet changes. I wish you and yours a very happy and peaceful Christmas. For the past two and half years, we have debated the important issues facing Ireland and our people, and I have no doubt that you will greatly miss our engagements here on a Tuesday and Wednesday. I wish you well.In his speech, Teachta Martin argued that this Government is successful and delivering. The rest of us must live in a very different Ireland from him.We live in Ireland where, during his time leading Government, the housing emergency has gotten worse, the crisis in health has gotten worse and households struggle to get by. He now passes the baton to Deputy Varadkar at a time where more than 11,000 of our people our homeless, including more than 3,000 children. Close to 1 million people are on treatment waiting lists. Many working families queue at food banks to get a hot meal. Surely, this cannot count as success.The Government said that there are no easy answers. However, that is not an acceptable response to those mothers frantic because their children wait for vital surgery, essential services and assessment of needs; to families distressed because they cannot pay the latest bill, the mortgage repayment or afford the rent; or to a child growing up in a bed and breakfast or a hotel room. There are no easy answers, but there are answers. There are solutions that a Government with the right priorities would grasp with both hands, but instead this Government chose to ignore them.The policies of Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael, not only over the past two and half years but since they joined together in 2016 have driven these crises. To dress up their failure as progress is to insult ordinary people who live with the consequences of those failures. Rather than being accountable and facing up to reality, they point the fingers at others. They hide behind excuses and present alibis for not getting the work done. It is a cop-out so typical of the parties which have passed power between each other for a century.Ireland is a great country – perhaps the greatest. Our people are great people who are achieving extraordinary things everyday, sometimes against all odds. What we need now is a Government worthy of them and worthy of their hopes and ambitions.Sinn Féin does not support the nomination of Deputy Varadkar as Taoiseach. The policies of Fine Gael have always been about ring-fencing the wealth and privilege of those at the top, pushing workers and families to the back of the queue, and the privatisation and hallowing out of public services. This has not changed under the leadership of Deputy Varadkar. Fine Gael and Deputy Varadkar have been in government now for 11 years. Fine Gael and Deputy Varadkar’s policies are writ large across the crises in housing, healthcare and the deep economic inequalities in Ireland today.It is no coincidence that during Fine Gael’s time in power people desperately struggle to put a roof over their heads. A generation is locked out of home ownership and renters have been fleeced by extortionate rent – an 82% increase since 2012. Housing policy is written for big developers, wealthy investors and corporate landlords. Fine Gael, of course, is the party that rolled out the red carpet for the cuckoo funds and the vulture funds. It could not wait to get them in, and now look at the damage being done.Fine Gael’s refusal to accept housing as a basic right has seen the crisis escalate to an emergency so bad that it is now spread to impact education, healthcare and our economy. It is no coincidence either that our hospitals are under unprecedented strain, with a never-ending trolley crisis, record waiting lists and a struggle to recruit and retain staff. The chickens of Fine Gael’s failure to invest in and resource our health service have come back to roost and it is patients who pay the price.We must remember that Deputy Varadkar has been at the centre of these crises, sitting at the Cabinet table for more than a decade, contributing to these terrible decisions, and eventually ascending to the office of An Taoiseach in 2017. We should not forget that Deputy Varadkar’s last Government ran out of road because of Fine Gael’s disastrous performance in the areas of health and housing, eventually falling to the prospect of a no-confidence vote in the then Minister for Health, Deputy Simon Harris.Nor should we forget that the revolving door of former Government Ministers into cushy jobs as lobbyists for banks and the insurance industry continued and thrived during Deputy Varadkar's term leading Government; from Cabinet to lobbyist in the blink of an eye.It is no coincidence that the Minister for Finance, Deputy Paschal Donohoe, is now ready to oversee the return of bumper pay to the top brass in the banks, backing the haves over the have-nots, showing up always for the insider class, looking after their friends in high places.This has always been the Fine Gael way. It is the Leo Varadkar way. The episode that defines Leo Varadkar's last term as Taoiseach is his leaking of a confidential Government document to a friend, something that he admitted to on the floor of this Dáil. While criminal proceedings were not pursued on this matter, serious questions remain.What was really worrying is that it is still Deputy Varadkar’s stated belief that he is somehow above having his actions questioned by the Standards in Public Office Commission, SIPO. Deputy Varadkar believes that power puts him beyond accountability. This is the view held by the man who now returns to the office of An Taoiseach, the man who recently told young people who were forced away from Ireland by his policies that the grass is not always greener in other countries. This is the man who invited exploited renters to remember that one person’s rent is another person's income. This is the man who advised a generation locked out of home ownership to borrow from their parents for a mortgage deposit, the bank of mammy and daddy. These are their views that emphasise loud and clear that Fine Gael and its friends in Fianna Fáil have been empowered for far too long----------they are out of touch, out of ideas and out of time. Deputy Micheál Martin has resigned as Taoiseach and the Government is dissolved. We should now have a general election because we need a change of Government.Tá a fhios againn cheana féin cad a fhaighimid leis an Teachta Varadkar mar Thaoiseach. Bhíomar anseo cheana. Diúltaíodh tithíocht agus cúram sláinte do dhaoine. Tá seirbhísí poiblí i ndroch-chaoi agus tá oibrithe agus teaghlaigh sáinnithe ag cúl na scuaine. Tá athrú Rialtais ag teastáil ag muintir na hÉireann, ní hamháin athrú Taoisigh.We face real challenges but there is hope, positivity and ambition amongst our people. Ireland has big opportunities in the coming decades, namely, the re-unification of our country, the achievement of energy independence and the power of our young people. Capturing these opportunities is the key to Ireland reaching our greatest days. These days are on the horizon and will belong to everyone, but we will not get there with Deputy Varadkar as Taoiseach. We will not get there on the watch of this Government, but we can get there with a change in leadership and with a change in direction. With a change in Government, we will get there. Today, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil, essentially the one party now, backed to the hilt by the Green Party, cling to power not in a demonstration of diversity or maturity, but as a demonstration of the claustrophobic sense of entitlement that above all else will work might and main to keep change out and to keep others out.Make no mistake, they cannot prevent the new dawn breaking. The light of the better tomorrow burns brightly and they can stand in the way of change, they can refuse to budge, they can slow it down, they can make the people wait a little longer, but they cannot and they will not stop that change.The touchpaper has been lit by the hopes of a new generation.The old ways are on borrowed time. Our future will be defined by equality, prosperity, unity and opportunity for all, building a strong, modern, vibrant all-Ireland economy. That is the future worth fighting for. It is a future that a Sinn Féin Government would work night and day to achieve for workers, for families, for communities and for Ireland.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-12-17	---	2	"I begin by offering my good wishes to Deputy Leo Varadkar as he enters the Office of An Taoiseach for the second time. To lead Government is a huge honour and an even greater responsibility. We all want those who assume this responsibility to succeed on behalf of the people of Ireland.Nearly three years ago, people voted for something new. Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have passed power between themselves for a century and our people have paid a heavy price for this perpetual merry-go-round. There has been a financial crash and recession, jobs lost, livelihoods ruined, homes repossessed, austerity, vicious cuts to public services and communities made to carry the can for the mistakes of those at the top.To break from the past, people reached hopefully for something they never had before, namely a Government that would put workers, families and communities first, with the determination to match their ambitions and hopes, seize Ireland's opportunities for the future and that would do what is necessary to improve their lives by fixing a broken housing system, tackling the crisis in our hospitals and working to build a fairer, sustainable and modern economy. Our people had a glimpse of what that might be, namely the historic chance of a Government for change.Following the 2020 general election, the Government's collective inspect was to come together to block that demand for change. After decades of pretence, all it took to bring Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael together was the threat to their power and positions.In the end, what mattered most to them was keeping others out.With this coalition, the people have another Government that fits neatly into the pattern of 100 years. It is a tired Government that resorts again and again to excuses and alibis instead of bringing real leadership, ambition and fresh ideas. This coalition of Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael and the Green Party has stuck to the age-old, worn-out playbook that sees workers and families failed, short-changed and left behind. It is a Government that persists with a way of doing business that prioritises insiders, the well-got and the well-connected. It is a system that keeps ordinary people on the outside looking in, that keeps children with scoliosis waiting in agony for life-changing surgery, that leaves elderly people on hospital trolleys for days and has working families relying on food banks for a decent meal.Back in 2020, I said that this broken Fianna Fáil-Fine Gael way of doing business means that Governments come and Governments go, but nothing really changes, and so it has come to pass. On the watch of this Government, the housing crisis has become a housing emergency, the crisis in our health service has deepened and, despite working very hard, thousands struggle to afford the basic necessities.Of all this Government’s failures, its failure in housing is inexcusable. It has spent the past two and a half years recycling the very policies that created the housing emergency in the first place. We now see the impact of this emergency on education, health and our economy. As teachers and nurses cannot pay extortionate rent or save for a deposit, they are leaving. They are going to Britain and the Middle East and our schools and our hospitals struggle to recruit and retain staff.Investment is threatened as workers are unable to take up good jobs with good salaries because they cannot afford secure housing. The human cost of the housing emergency is tragedy upon tragedy. It is now driving our young people out of Ireland in search of a better life. They look around and see houses they will never be able to afford to buy. They walk past fancy build-to-let apartments they will never live in. At hurling or camogie training or over a pint, they talk with their friends about their future and they just do not see one at home. Many parents will spend this Christmas watching their sons and daughters pack their bags to take long flights away from their families and home to live in Toronto, Boston or Sydney. Forced emigration is back with us again. Yet, this Government stands by and watches this happen.There is no doubt that this Government’s failure to fix housing has done real damage to our society. It threatens our international reputation and our competitiveness but so much worse, it smothers the chance of our country reaching its full potential. Governments are here to serve the people. Governments should be judged on their record, and the record of this Government is one of spectacular failure.The changeover of Taoiseach and the swapping of ministerial office will not change anything. Some 100 years ago, a great republican leader by the name of Liam Mellows said ""men who get into positions and hold power will desire to remain undisturbed and will not want to be removed, or will not take a step that will mean removal in case of failure"". Liam Mellows was right. The man sitting at the Taoiseach’s office is changing but there will be no change in policy, direction or delivery. Indeed, Deputy Varadkar’s first act as Taoiseach now is to reappoint Ministers who have failed to get the job done. He rewards incompetence and failure.The truth is that we need a change of Government, not just a change of Taoiseach.Is dromchlach é an rud atá ag tarlú inniu. Tá an fear atá in Oifig an Taoisigh ag athrú, ach ní bheidh aon athrú ar pholasaí ná ar threo an Rialtais. Teastaíonn athrú Rialtais uainn, ní amháin athrú Thaoisigh.Of course, there is the real danger that people looking on at this meaningless shuffling of positions may become disheartened, but I am asking people everywhere not to surrender your belief in change. I am asking you not to give up or to give in. Hold tightly to your hope. A new and united Ireland is about you. A new and united Ireland is for you. A new day is on the horizon. We have never been so close to achieving real change. This hope is especially important for our young people, young people who want to be given their chance, young people who will achieve great things if we give them their moment. We need a Government that will work for them and with them to change Ireland into an Ireland that gives our young people a life of opportunity, an opportunity to stay and build a good life. The opportunity to travel and experience the world without being forced out and the opportunity to come home.Our people, particularly our young people, deserve an ambitious Government that says it can do it, how we will do it and that we will get the work done. Sinn Féin wants to lead a Government for change, a Government that will house our people, that will build strong public services, achieve energy independence and advance Ireland’s journey to full nationhood.As we approach the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement, it is now time to write the next chapter. It is time to plan, to prepare for democratic, constitutional change. It is time for the Government to establish a citizens' assembly on Irish unity.As we move forward, we will look again to a spirit of partnership. The people of the North are entitled to a Government. We need the political institutions up and running, delivering for all communities. That is the best way to build progress and a better tomorrow. It is time to cast aside the small thinking of the past. It is time to do big things for Ireland and for our people. It is time to give those of us who are committed to change the chance to show what we can do. If I were given the chance to lead a Government of change, I would stand before the people and I would say this: we set out to end the housing emergency because we believe that every person has the right to a roof over their head and we will not stop until this is achieved.We set out to build a fair health service for all of Ireland because we believe that every person has the right to treatment and to care and we will not stop until this is achieved. We set out to build our economy, our prosperity, because we believe all people are equal and are deserving of opportunity and we will not stop until this is achieved. We set out to end partition, to unite Ireland in our time, because we believe that we are stronger together and we will not stop until we achieve this. This is the type of ambition that Ireland needs and Sinn Féin is ready to lead, to govern and to deliver. We believe that people should be given a straight choice: the tired performance of this failed Government or Sinn Féin’s positive, ambitious, achievable vision for Ireland.So much has changed in the last three years. If the Taoiseach is so confident that his Government and his policies command the support of the people, then he should give them this choice in a general election. Let the people have their say and let the people choose who leads."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-12-15	---	1	Early this morning, the shocking news reached Ireland that a member of our Defence Forces serving with the UN peacekeeping mission in Lebanon had been killed. Private Shane Kearney and two others were also injured. We hope and pray for their speedy recovery. I extend my deepest sympathies to the family and friends of Private Seán Rooney of Newtowncunningham in County Donegal, the soldier killed, as they try to cope with an immense and overwhelming loss. It is devastating news to receive at any time, but that this family will bear this sudden and incredible grief at Christmas is truly heartbreaking. No words expressed in the Chamber will be enough but I hope the family will take what comfort they can from the knowledge the people of Ireland hold them in our hearts and thoughts.My thoughts are also with the members of the Irish Defence Forces, Óglaigh na hÉireann, especially those serving overseas. I will make special mention of those serving with UNIFIL and the soldiers of the 121st Infantry Battalion for whom the coming days and weeks will be especially difficult. Our peacekeepers are heroes. They define the Irish spirit of courage, compassion and caring and our inherent desire to keep people safe. This tragedy underscores the very serious risks and real danger they face in the name of peace. They carry out their duties on the ground with communities and protect people by putting their lives on the line. We do not, nor will we ever, take for granted their bravery, integrity and inspiring sense of duty.We also recognise the resilience of their families who often go for very long periods without seeing them. The legacy of Irish peacekeeping missions for decades stands as a testament to the very positive role our Defence Forces play in a challenging world - a world that is often volatile, violent and unpredictable. Our peacekeepers bring calm, stability and safe haven by working to prevent war. By standing for protection against suffering, our peacekeepers have done Ireland and humanity some service, and it is for these reasons the people of Ireland are so very proud of all of them. It is for these reasons the death of Private Seán Rooney, an Irish peacekeeper so far away from his home, reverberates with grief to the four corners of our small island, the country he went away to serve. It is for these reasons we stand in sorrow with his bereft family. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam dílis.Tá teaghlach agus náisiún in éide bhróin tar éis báis thragóideach choimeádaí síochána Éireannaí sa Liobáin. Is nuacht fíorbhrónach é. Tá caillteanas d’fhulaingt roimh a theaghlach agus a chairde. Léiríonn an tragóid seo an baol agus na contúirtí atá roimh bhaill dár bhfórsa síochána le blianta fada anuas in ainm na síochána ar fud an domhain. Tá muintir na hÉireann chomh bródúil as an oidhreacht síochánaíochta. Today, a family, a community and a nation mourns.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-12-14	---	1	"A report published by HIQA this morning is a damning indictment of Government health policy. It states emergency departments are now under ""unprecedented strain"", echoing the concerns of the INMO that our hospitals face a nightmare winter. Last month was the worst November on record for hospital overcrowding. Twelve thousand six hundred and twenty-four patients were on trolleys. The HIQA report cites that one patient in University Hospital Limerick was left waiting nearly five days for a bed. That is not a unique case. Every Deputy in the Dáil has stories of patients who were left on trolleys for days on end. Chronic overcrowding creates dangerous situations, and HIQA highlights how patients must often wait far too long to be triaged for care.It is the incompetence and inaction of the Minister for Health, Deputy Donnelly, that are at the centre of this crisis. After two and a half years in office, he has failed to do what needs to be done. First, patients cannot get admitted because a quarter of the beds promised by the Government more than two years ago have not been delivered. Second, the Minister has not solved the delayed discharge problem. There are as many delayed discharges in the system as there are patients on trolleys. Patients cannot be discharged from hospital because of the lack of community recovery and step-down beds. Third, the Minister has failed to solve the crisis in home care. We now have more than 5,000 older people on home care waiting lists. This has been brewing for years, and it sees older people pushed into hospitals and nursing homes when they should be cared for in their own homes. There are no carers available to them because the Minister has failed to plan a sufficient workforce and address long-term pay and conditions issues that have harmed recruitment and retention. At the same time, people can hardly see a GP anymore. This exerts even more pressure on hospitals and emergency departments.If progress is ever going to be made, the Government must get serious about delivering the right care in the right place and at the right time. This means urgently building bed capacity in our hospitals. It means rapidly increasing the number of community and step-down beds. We need a clear plan to address the lack of GPs and deficits in primary care. Crucially, the Government must invest in home care for our older people.Taispeánann tuarascáil HIQA inniu gur tharla an róphlódú sna hospidéil go díreach de bharr teip an Aire, an Teachta Stephen Donnelly, sa phleanáil. Teip iomlán atá ann chun tuilleadh leapacha sa bhreis a chur ar fáil, agus tá an easpa infheistíochta i gcúram pobail agus baile ag cur brú ar an gcóras as a dtagann iarmhairtí tromchúiseacha. The Government's lack of planning and urgency in getting to grips with the bottlenecks in our hospitals must end.I have some questions. The Minister for Health promised 51 additional consultants for our emergency departments. How many are now in place? For months, the Minister has promised an action plan to tackle hospital overcrowding. We have seen neither hide nor hair of it. Where is this plan? Can the Minister explain why one in four beds promised by the Government over two years ago has yet to materialise? When will we see these come on stream?No, it is not.The Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Michael McGrath, should not reach for the 136,000 good staff in the health service to try to hide behind them, nor should he reach to Tory austerity in Britain to try to spare the blushes the Government rightly experiences because of its absolute failure to resource the health service.The Minister for Health, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, has a penchant for launching and announcing plans but very often does not deliver on them. The winter plan was announced quite separately from the plan to tackle overcrowding in hospitals. I asked where the latter plan is. Clearly, it does not exist. That is the only conclusion I can draw.I also asked the Minister about bed capacity. The Minister is currently the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform. Riddle me this. He made an announcement in 2020 promising 1,200 new beds. Two years on and one quarter of those beds have not been delivered. This is a crisis of capacity, of staffing and of investment, but above all else it is a political crisis and an abject failure of leadership by the Government and by the Minister for Health, Deputy Donnelly.What of the 1,200 beds?Is that why people are on trolleys?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-12-13	---	1	"Well, Taoiseach, this is it: our last exchange.Before I put my question to the Taoiseach, which I have no doubt he will answer in full with a fully amplified answer, I wish him and his the very best for the future, whatever that might bring.There has been major disruption at Dublin Airport over the past of couple of days. Flights in and out of the airport have been cancelled or delayed and people's travel plans have been thrown into chaos. Some were booked onto later flights, many had to make alternative arrangements and others faced the prospect of booking expensive accommodation they had not budgeted for. Airport users have told stories of being sent from pillar to post when seeking information following the cancellation of their flights and there has been serious frustration, confusion and a sense of ""Here we go again"". I appreciate that a spell of extreme cold weather presents challenges, and I also accept there have been some knock-on effects from disruption at other airports. However, we cannot shy away from the fact that once again, there has been a real failure to prepare at Dublin Airport and there has not been a word from the Minister for Transport, Deputy Eamon Ryan, or from the Government.It seems the lessons of the summer have gone unlearned.We have a right to expect that part of the contingency planning for wintertime at a major European airport would be a plan to keep flights going during a cold snap, yet it seems planning for the de-icing of aircraft and runways was only an afterthought, as management was taken by surprise. Once again, we see authorities scrambling around rather than being prepared for a scenario that was entirely foreseeable and we have been here before. In the summer, the failure to plan at Dublin Airport brought chaos and the situation, as the Taoiseach will recall, spiralled out of control because the Minister for Transport failed to get to grips with the crisis. Now it seems the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, is asleep at the wheel again.Christmas is the busiest time of the year at Dublin Airport. Approximately 1 million people will pass through the airport during the holidays. It is a time when people reconnect, when many of our young people who have emigrated will return home to their families and friends, and the only scenes we should see at Dublin Airport at Christmastime are scenes of joy, happiness and reconnection. We cannot have a return to the mayhem that enveloped the airport during the summer. It is the responsibility of the Government, and the Minister in particular, to ensure all preparations are made. Ours is a small, island nation; we rely heavily on our airports to ensure our connectivity with the rest of the world. Along with the personal distress, episodes of significant disruption damage Ireland’s international reputation for business and investment. That is the reality. The Minister must wake up and do his job to ensure Dublin Airport runs properly. We cannot afford more chaos.Tá an cur isteach mór atá ag tarlú ag Aerfort Bhaile Átha Cliath doghlactha. Tá an tAire Iompair, an Teachta Eamon Ryan, ina chodladh arís. Caithfidh sé a chuid oibre a dhéanamh agus a chinntiú nach mbeidh cíorthuathail againn san aerfort i rith na Nollag. The Government must step forward and be proactive. There has to be a plan for this. Has the Taoiseach spoken to the Minister about the current disruption at Dublin Airport? Has he instructed the Minister to intervene immediately in order that we do not have a return to travel chaos at Dublin Airport this Christmas?Deputy Mattie McGrath shared with us that he would want to be defrosted.When people again see scenes of delay and cancellations in Dublin Airport there is a real concern over the ongoing lack of preparedness. I accept that the Dublin Airport Authority and the airlines have a case to answer here, but ultimately public confidence will only be built if there is a sense that the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, actually has a plan. I accept that others have met and made contingency arrangements during a snap of very hard cold weather. This close to Christmas with so many people coming home we need public reassurance that the Minister is fully engaged. I ask the Taoiseach to give more detail of that. He said there was a meeting with the Dublin Airport Authority. What was the upshot of that? It is not the only airport on the island, but it is the key hub airport.For a long time, some local residents have sought a meeting with the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, in respect of a change to flight patterns outside of the planning permission that had been granted. If he is, as the Taoiseach claims, wide awake, bright eyed and bushy-tailed, could he do these residents the good grace of meeting them?Cá bhfuil an tAire, an Teachta Eamon Ryan?I did not ask about an tAire, Deputy O’Brien. We will come to him later. Where is the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-12-13	---	2	Believe it or not, it is now seven months since the Northern Ireland Assembly election in the North and the people are still without a Government as the DUP maintains its boycott of the political institutions. It is my understanding the Tories' very reckless Northern Ireland protocol Bill has been put on ice until the new year.In her address to the Oireachtas recently, the European Commission President, Ms Ursula von der Leyen, made it clear she is hopeful progress can be made on the protocol. I share that hope. Space has now been created for negotiations. The question is whether this space is being used to get a deal to restore the institutions. Mr. Rishi Sunak became British Prime Minister at the end of October. He has yet to engage properly with parties in the North. Has the Taoiseach been in touch with Mr. Sunak?What steps is the Irish Government taking to use the space now created to achieve progress, a result, the retention of the protocol and, crucially, government in the North?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-12-13	---	3	Cuirim fáilte roimh chlann Aylward, roimh Helena, Bob, Triona, Mark, Lisa, Dylan, Leah, Taylor, Margaret, Jack, Kate, and Ella. It is easy knowing they are a political dynasty the younger members of the clan being so totally at home in the House. It is an omen of things to come, perhaps.I was very saddened to hear of the passing of Bobby Aylward in July. I really liked Bobby. He was a good and decent man who cared deeply about people. As was said, he had a deep love for Kilkenny and especially for his own local community of Mullinavat.Bobby was also a passionate GAA man. He lived and breathed for his beloved Ballyhale Shamrocks. I understand he was proud to be cathaoirleach of that famous club, a position he held until the time of his death.As the Taoiseach has said, he gave so much to those he represented, first as a member of Kilkenny County Council and later, on the national level, as a Teachta Dála. Bobby came from staunch Fianna Fáil stock. His brother Liam held the Dáil seat in the constituency for 30 years, later becoming an MEP, and their father, Bob, served as a Senator in the mid-1970s. Bobby was highly respected within the ranks of Fianna Fáil as he carried a family tradition of public service. As has been said, Bobby was an energetic campaigner during elections and I understand he brought that energy to the internal Fianna Fáil dynamic as much as he did to the rest of us. When he lost his Dáil seat in the 2011 general election, he demonstrated great resilience and staying power and was re-elected in the by-election of 2015. Bobby was a quintessential man of the people. As a public representative, he never saw a problem as too big or too small to warrant his attention. If he could help somebody, he always tried his level best; I can bear personal testament to that.I got to know Bobby when we served together on the Committee of Public Accounts. I found him to be friendly, upfront, decent and above all, genuine. He always had a smile and said hello and he was always up for a chat and for the craic. I recall, a number of years ago, I was in Hugginstown to address a commemoration for the Manchester Martyrs. That is the commemoration when you carry a lit sod of turf so it was freezing cold. Following the event, I popped into the local pub, English's, to warm my bones and lo and behold, who would rise to greet me only the bold Bobby Aylward. He proceeded to introduce me in detail to everybody in the pub with great enthusiasm and humour. It was a moment of warmth that was so typical of him and one that I greatly appreciated and will always remember.Bobby's loss is greatly felt by all who knew him, and especially by those who loved him so dearly. Ar mo shon agus ar son Shinn Féin, I extend the deepest of condolences to Bobby's beloved wife, Helena; their three children, Bob, Mark and Triona; his grandchildren; his brothers and sisters; Bobby's wide circle of family and friends; and his colleagues in the Fianna Fáil Party. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam dílis.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-12-07	---	1	Vicky Phelan died three weeks ago. The Taoiseach knows she spent her final years fighting for change. She was very clear on what she wanted to see. To recall, she said to the political system:I don't want your accolades or your broken promises. I want action. I want change. I want accountability.It was a most eloquent and heartbreaking call to action for all of the women and their families affected by the CervicalCheck scandal.As the Taoiseach knows, mandatory disclosure and a duty of candour was one of Vicky's core demands. Mandatory disclosure means a legal obligation on clinicians and health care providers to tell a woman if there had been a discordant, erroneous or incorrect reading of her cervical cancer screening slide. There was consensus in the Oireachtas that the original patient safety Bill did not provide for this demand. The week that Vicky died the Taoiseach assured the Dáil that an amendment to the legislation to correct for this flaw would be brought forward.At that time I said to the Taoiseach that the Opposition would work with the Government to get the legislation right and get it over the line before the Christmas recess. This remains my position and our commitment. However, we have a problem in that the amendment proposed by the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, does not provide for mandatory disclosure. There is provision for a right to review and this is welcome. However, there is a distinction between a right to review and a positive obligation on a clinician or a health service provider to reveal and pass on information. Mandatory disclosure where the legal responsibility is on clinicians and organisations is what the women fought for. It is the measure recommended by Dr. Gabriel Scally in his scoping inquiry.Let me cut to the chase in all of this. I believe there are still serious flaws in the legislation. I do not believe the amendments the Minister has proposed address these flaws. Above all else there is no way that two hours today is sufficient time for us to tease our way through this legislation to get it right. The objective here has to be to get this right. I do not believe either that the House should divide on this matter. We were of one voice when we marked the death of Vicky. We said that we would work together. I am asking the Taoiseach as head of the Government for us to work together. What this means in my strong opinion is that we have the debate for two hours today after which we adjourn it and that more time is made available next week.There is concern beyond the definition of mandatory disclosure or the duty of candour about the review process itself. There is no legal obligation for the woman at the point of diagnosis to be told she has a right to the review. What is very worrying from my point of view is a provision that means in the case of CervicalCheck and the laboratories that the laboratories themselves would decide the scope and shape of the reviews. I do not believe that we can pass legislation that lets these things go. Again I ask the Taoiseach to work with us. I know I have the support of the Labour Party and others on the Opposition benches. We really have to get this right. I believe we can get it right and over the line before we rise for Christmas.The Taoiseach does not have to convince any of us of the need for that kind of meta-analysis for educational purposes and, more important, for quality control and assurance. I remind the House that this legislation is about the provision of information. It is not about medical malpractice or any other legal processes. This is about information. I believe the Taoiseach, like the rest of us, wants to get this right for women. There are serious matters in this Bill that need to be teased through to ensure we get it right. Two hours for the debate is simply not sufficient to get that work done. At the end of the day, people will ask what real difference would this have made in Vicky's or other women's cases and what difference it will make going forward. I am concerned about the anonymised nature of the audits. While the right to a review is welcome, there is no legal obligation for a patient under CervicalCheck to be informed of the right of review. These things need a little bit more time and we have the scope, this week or next week, to afford more time to this. I ask that we adjourn after two hours and afford more time to the debate to be absolutely sure that we get it right. We have waited for four years and a half years for this legislation. A couple of more hours is required to make sure we get it right.We need more time.It is imperative we get it right.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-12-07	---	2	The housing emergency is now spilling into education. Schools are really struggling to recruit teachers, teachers cannot afford the extortionate rents that are being charged and many are locked out of any real opportunity of ever purchasing their own home. I was shocked and gobsmacked to hear the Minister for Education's first response to this was a suggestion of cancelling career breaks for teachers, not least because she herself is on a career break from teaching. Clearly that is not the answer. Will the Taoiseach make clear to the Dáil that the cancellation of career breaks is not what is in mind? Furthermore, will he set out what the Government will do to address this real crisis in recruitment of teachers, which is wholly traceable to the housing crisis that has come on the Taoiseach's watch?Deputy Gould is never wrong.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-12-06	---	1	The report published this morning by the Banking and Payment Federation of Ireland, BPFI, confirms what we already know, which is that the housing policy of the Government is failing abysmally. The BPFI analysis is stark. Since 2010, rents in Ireland have soared by a whopping 82% compared with an EU average of 18% for the same period. This rip-off of Ireland's renters has happened on the watch of Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael. Crazy rents are robbing tenants of any hope of getting a deposit together to buy their own homes and is trapping them in an extortionate nightmare.Today’s report also highlights that housing supply is nowhere near keeping up with population growth. It states our population is growing at three times the rate of housing supply. Since 2011, the State's population has grown by 500,000 but only 130,000 housing units were added in this time. Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have been getting it wrong on for more than a decade and they are still getting it wrong now. Serious concerns are also raised regarding the decline in housing commencements throughout the State. In the middle of a housing emergency, the rate of housing construction is falling. Things are bad now but unless the Government brings the urgency and ambition required, things will get a whole lot worse.We have repeatedly told the Government that its targets for social and affordable housing are far too low. Its targets are a drop in the ocean and it is not even meeting them. It is not just Sinn Féin saying this; it is housing organisations on the front line of this emergency and officials in the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage who recently stated that the Government has seriously underestimated its housing targets.Sadly, many of our young people now look to a life beyond Ireland. The Central Statistics Office tells us nearly half of renters are considering emigrating because of the crippling cost of living. Many mothers and fathers will spend this Christmas watching their sons and daughters pack their bags for Australia and Canada. Is it any wonder when Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael remain wedded to policies that put cuckoo funds and wealthy investors above young people's need to get a decent start? This is so wrong. We need our young people here at home. We need their talent, energy and ideas. What else can we expect of them when they cannot put a roof over their heads in Ireland?What other option do they really have, when the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O’Brien, says that we do not have a housing emergency? Deimhníonn tuarascáil an BPFI dáiríreacht na héigeandála tithíochta. Is féidir le hAirí oifigí a mhalartú mas mian leo. Chun difríocht a dhéanamh i ndáiríre, tá athrú polasaithe tithíochta fiúntach ag teastáil go práinneach.Today’s report lays it out plainly. It turns out that, despite the Tánaiste, Deputy Varadkar, lecturing our young people, in fact the grass is greener elsewhere, especially for renters. There has been an 82% rent hike in Ireland versus an average of 18% across the EU. That is some punch in the gut for renters. It is a rip-off on a massive scale and yet the Government does nothing about it. Does the Minister now accept that it is time for the Government to intervene decisively, to put a month’s rent back into renters’ pockets through a refundable tax credit and finally to ban rent increases for three years?Let me tell the Minister this: the Government's policies are driving an entire generation of our young people to Perth, Sydney, Toronto and beyond.That is what the Government is at. I will tell the Minister what our policies will do: our approach will move heaven and earth to keep those young people at home or, if they have gone away, to give them an opportunity to come back. The Minister describes this as a significant challenge. Let us get the language right. This is an emergency and a disaster for families in their real, lived lives and the Government has dragged its feet-----It comes in here week after week to tell fairy tales and make-believe, imagining its approach is working, when it is plainly failing. I drew the Minister's attention to the distinction between an 82% growth in rents as against 18%, which is the EU average and I asked how the Government would respond to thatI have given the Minister two ideas: one is a refundable tax credit for renters to put a month's rent back in their pockets and reduce rents; and a complete and effective ban on rent increases. Will the Minister deal with those two issues?It is not working.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-12-01	---	1	Ireland is a proud, ancient European nation. In the new year, we will mark 50 years since becoming a member of what was then the European Communities in 1973. Since then, it has been quite a journey. There have been so many positive advances in areas such as equality, workers’ rights, environmental standards and economic progress. There have been many challenges too, including growing militarisation, deregulation and privatisation, to mention just some. However, on this journey, solidarity, fairness and a conviction that we can be at our strongest when we work together to make a real, positive difference to people’s lives has guided our greatest successes.I warmly welcome President von der Leyen. Cuirim fáilte mór roimpi go dtí an Teach. Through her leadership of the Commission, she has been a very good friend to Ireland and demonstrated her desire to work with Ireland towards these common goals.This year, Europe has shown the power of its unity and solidarity in standing squarely with the people of Ukraine. Vladimir Putin’s barbaric invasion has shocked the world. His illegal and unjust war must be stopped and the horror and bloodshed must end. In this time of crisis, Europe has come together in solidarity with the people of Ukraine as they endure and courageously resist this grotesque war. This solidarity has sent a powerful message to Putin that Ukraine is not alone, and that Europe and Ireland will stand up for what is right.Recent years have also shown Ireland the importance of European solidarity as we weather the storm of Brexit. There was never any such thing as a good Brexit for Ireland. The people of the North of Ireland voted to remain in the EU, but were dragged out against their will by Britain, spearheaded by the Tories at the urging of the Democratic Unionist Party, DUP. Throughout years of fractious negotiations, the EU stood steadfast with Ireland and our determination to protect our peace process and the Good Friday Agreement - a peace agreement that will be 25 years old next year - which has transformed our island and shown that conflict can end and peace can triumph. Prior to the Good Friday Agreement, British Army checkpoints marked the Border. British military installations, built and reinforced from the 1970s onwards, were symbols of division and conflict. The invisible border on the island of Ireland has now become our greatest symbol of peace. There can never be a return to a hard Border in Ireland. I welcome President von der Leyen's forceful assertion of that reality today.It is important to acknowledge that the Good Friday Agreement is a mighty diplomatic success, not just for Ireland but the European Union. For that, we commend and thank President von der Leyen. The EU has been a critical partner for peace, providing political and financial support leading to greater economic and social progress on an all-island basis. It is important to acknowledge and thank, in particular, Michel Barnier, Maroš Šefčovič and their teams for their determination and tenacity in holding firm in defence of the Good Friday Agreement and the protocol defending peace and progress in Ireland. The EU’s solidarity will remain essential to us as we continue to address the fallout of Brexit.Currently, the institutions in the North of our country lie dormant as the DUP continues its shameful boycott. Workers and families in the North pay the price of not having an Executive to work hard and deliver for them during the current cost-of-living crisis. It bears repeating that the protocol is working. It is necessary to protect the North from the damages inflicted by Brexit. It is supported, as President von der Leyen knows, by the majority of democratically elected representatives in the North and throughout the island. While issues around the implementation of the protocol exist, they can be resolved by good faith engagement. We must see calm and clear leadership from those at the negotiating table. We heard words from the new British Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak. He has committed to restoring the political institutions and resolving issues around the implementation of the protocol. Of course, those words are very welcome but they must be matched by action and meaningful talks between the British Government and the European Commission. I know it is President von der Leyen's fervent desire to engage constructively. That is precisely what is needed, not sabre-rattling or any more threats to breach international law.Ireland has changed and is changing. Brexit is responsible for some of that. The EU took a significant decision when it stated to our then Taoiseach, Enda Kenny, at the outset of Brexit that, in the context of Irish reunification, the North will automatically rejoin the EU and the North’s citizens will become full EU citizens once again. That is a very important statement recognising that the Good Friday Agreement sets out the next step on Ireland’s journey; the ending of partition and the holding of referendums on reunification. The responsible thing for all of us to do now is to prepare for democratic, orderly and planned constitutional change. President von der Leyen acknowledged our great love of saoirse, freedom, and our refusal to give up, concede or surrender to division or discrimination. We have come a very long way but we have another length of the journey to go. Just as the Commission played a key role in the peace process, I believe that the EU can and will play a positive role in the last length of that journey to Irish reunification, namely, a united Ireland within the EU.Tá an t-athrú seo ag tarlú tar éis 50 bliain de bhallraíocht na tíre san Aontas Eorpach. Is é an rud is tábhachtaí sa chomhrá seo ná go gcaithfimid éisteacht le muintir na hEorpa. Tá dúil aige sa chomhionannas agus sa phróiseas. Caithfear todhchaí a thógáil ina mbeidh oibrithe, teaghlaigh agus pobail cosanta os cionn leasanna dílsithe nó iad siúd a bhfuil cumhacht acu. We want to see a bridging of the democratic deficit at a European level. We want to see advances on workers' rights, environmental protection, social justice, sustainable and ethical trade, research and development, which are all areas where we can make progress but they will challenge the EU. They will challenge certain orthodoxies and we must rise to that challenge. The climate emergency is an existential one. As Ireland works to secure energy security and energy independence, as President von der Leyen acknowledged, and a greener future for younger generations, we know that solidarity is crucial in delivering the major changes that are needed to secure a really meaningful impact. Through working together on these issues, we can deliver tangible and lasting change to our citizens’ lives. That is our vision for Europe.We are an island nation at once on the periphery of Europe and at the heart of Europe. However, to be Irish is not simply to be from a small nation. We are also part of a powerful global family. We are something of an outlier as a European state in that we were colonised; we were not the coloniser. We have seen conflict, partition and occupation. We are and will remain a militarily neutral and non-aligned country. The President quoted a formidable Irish American earlier on and I want to go to the other side of the world and echo the words shared in this Chamber 35 years ago by the then Australian Prime Minister, Bob Hawke. He described us well when he said:Ireland is the head of a huge empire in which Australia and the United States are the principal provinces. It is an empire acquired not by force of Irish arms but by force of Irish character, an empire not of political coercion but of spiritual affiliation, created by the thousands upon thousands of Irish men and women who chose to leave these shores, or who were banished from them, to help in the building of new societies over the years.In an increasingly complex world in which our multilateral institutions must work and prevail, the presence of military neutrals and non-aligned countries can be a critical interlocutor in the work of peace, disarmament and social justice. The next step is the recognition and acknowledgement of military neutrals and non-aligned countries within the EU treaties and EU basic law. That must happen within the Constitution of our country also. This would be a hugely positive step forward and would add to the diplomatic repertoire and scope of the European Union.There is no doubt there are many challenges facing Europe. If we are true to our shared commitments and values, they can show what can be achieved through solidarity and resolve and they can improve our citizens’ lives. We remain committed to working with our European friends on these issues as we work for a better life for all our people. Seasann muid ag tráth athraithe san Eoraip. Is tráth dúshlánach é a chuireann deiseanna os ár gcomhair. Is am don rogha é freisin. Is féidir le todhchaí na hEorpa a bheith mar cheann de dhul chun cinn.We stand at a crossroads and we have decisions to make. The future of Europe can be one of retreat or one of hopeful progress; we must choose progress. It can be a future in which citizens can be disillusioned or empowered; we must choose empowerment. It can be a future of opportunities for the few at the top or a future of opportunity and prosperity for all; we must choose a race to the top. Now is the time to look forward to the future with ambition and hope. By working together we can build a new Ireland and reinvigorate the vision of Europe. We still believe we can make Ireland better. We still know we can help in making Europe better and we believe above all that, working together, we can make the world better too.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-12-01	---	1	Ireland is a proud, ancient European nation. In the new year, we will mark 50 years since becoming a member of what was then the European Communities in 1973. Since then, it has been quite a journey. There have been so many positive advances in areas such as equality, workers’ rights, environmental standards and economic progress. There have been many challenges too, including growing militarisation, deregulation and privatisation, to mention just some. However, on this journey, solidarity, fairness and a conviction that we can be at our strongest when we work together to make a real, positive difference to people’s lives has guided our greatest successes.I warmly welcome President von der Leyen. Cuirim fáilte mór roimpi go dtí an Teach. Through her leadership of the Commission, she has been a very good friend to Ireland and demonstrated her desire to work with Ireland towards these common goals.This year, Europe has shown the power of its unity and solidarity in standing squarely with the people of Ukraine. Vladimir Putin’s barbaric invasion has shocked the world. His illegal and unjust war must be stopped and the horror and bloodshed must end. In this time of crisis, Europe has come together in solidarity with the people of Ukraine as they endure and courageously resist this grotesque war. This solidarity has sent a powerful message to Putin that Ukraine is not alone, and that Europe and Ireland will stand up for what is right.Recent years have also shown Ireland the importance of European solidarity as we weather the storm of Brexit. There was never any such thing as a good Brexit for Ireland. The people of the North of Ireland voted to remain in the EU, but were dragged out against their will by Britain, spearheaded by the Tories at the urging of the Democratic Unionist Party, DUP. Throughout years of fractious negotiations, the EU stood steadfast with Ireland and our determination to protect our peace process and the Good Friday Agreement - a peace agreement that will be 25 years old next year - which has transformed our island and shown that conflict can end and peace can triumph. Prior to the Good Friday Agreement, British Army checkpoints marked the Border. British military installations, built and reinforced from the 1970s onwards, were symbols of division and conflict. The invisible border on the island of Ireland has now become our greatest symbol of peace. There can never be a return to a hard Border in Ireland. I welcome President von der Leyen's forceful assertion of that reality today.It is important to acknowledge that the Good Friday Agreement is a mighty diplomatic success, not just for Ireland but the European Union. For that, we commend and thank President von der Leyen. The EU has been a critical partner for peace, providing political and financial support leading to greater economic and social progress on an all-island basis. It is important to acknowledge and thank, in particular, Michel Barnier, Maroš Šefčovič and their teams for their determination and tenacity in holding firm in defence of the Good Friday Agreement and the protocol defending peace and progress in Ireland. The EU’s solidarity will remain essential to us as we continue to address the fallout of Brexit.Currently, the institutions in the North of our country lie dormant as the DUP continues its shameful boycott. Workers and families in the North pay the price of not having an Executive to work hard and deliver for them during the current cost-of-living crisis. It bears repeating that the protocol is working. It is necessary to protect the North from the damages inflicted by Brexit. It is supported, as President von der Leyen knows, by the majority of democratically elected representatives in the North and throughout the island. While issues around the implementation of the protocol exist, they can be resolved by good faith engagement. We must see calm and clear leadership from those at the negotiating table. We heard words from the new British Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak. He has committed to restoring the political institutions and resolving issues around the implementation of the protocol. Of course, those words are very welcome but they must be matched by action and meaningful talks between the British Government and the European Commission. I know it is President von der Leyen's fervent desire to engage constructively. That is precisely what is needed, not sabre-rattling or any more threats to breach international law.Ireland has changed and is changing. Brexit is responsible for some of that. The EU took a significant decision when it stated to our then Taoiseach, Enda Kenny, at the outset of Brexit that, in the context of Irish reunification, the North will automatically rejoin the EU and the North’s citizens will become full EU citizens once again. That is a very important statement recognising that the Good Friday Agreement sets out the next step on Ireland’s journey; the ending of partition and the holding of referendums on reunification. The responsible thing for all of us to do now is to prepare for democratic, orderly and planned constitutional change. President von der Leyen acknowledged our great love of saoirse, freedom, and our refusal to give up, concede or surrender to division or discrimination. We have come a very long way but we have another length of the journey to go. Just as the Commission played a key role in the peace process, I believe that the EU can and will play a positive role in the last length of that journey to Irish reunification, namely, a united Ireland within the EU.Tá an t-athrú seo ag tarlú tar éis 50 bliain de bhallraíocht na tíre san Aontas Eorpach. Is é an rud is tábhachtaí sa chomhrá seo ná go gcaithfimid éisteacht le muintir na hEorpa. Tá dúil aige sa chomhionannas agus sa phróiseas. Caithfear todhchaí a thógáil ina mbeidh oibrithe, teaghlaigh agus pobail cosanta os cionn leasanna dílsithe nó iad siúd a bhfuil cumhacht acu. We want to see a bridging of the democratic deficit at a European level. We want to see advances on workers' rights, environmental protection, social justice, sustainable and ethical trade, research and development, which are all areas where we can make progress but they will challenge the EU. They will challenge certain orthodoxies and we must rise to that challenge. The climate emergency is an existential one. As Ireland works to secure energy security and energy independence, as President von der Leyen acknowledged, and a greener future for younger generations, we know that solidarity is crucial in delivering the major changes that are needed to secure a really meaningful impact. Through working together on these issues, we can deliver tangible and lasting change to our citizens’ lives. That is our vision for Europe.We are an island nation at once on the periphery of Europe and at the heart of Europe. However, to be Irish is not simply to be from a small nation. We are also part of a powerful global family. We are something of an outlier as a European state in that we were colonised; we were not the coloniser. We have seen conflict, partition and occupation. We are and will remain a militarily neutral and non-aligned country. The President quoted a formidable Irish American earlier on and I want to go to the other side of the world and echo the words shared in this Chamber 35 years ago by the then Australian Prime Minister, Bob Hawke. He described us well when he said:Ireland is the head of a huge empire in which Australia and the United States are the principal provinces. It is an empire acquired not by force of Irish arms but by force of Irish character, an empire not of political coercion but of spiritual affiliation, created by the thousands upon thousands of Irish men and women who chose to leave these shores, or who were banished from them, to help in the building of new societies over the years.In an increasingly complex world in which our multilateral institutions must work and prevail, the presence of military neutrals and non-aligned countries can be a critical interlocutor in the work of peace, disarmament and social justice. The next step is the recognition and acknowledgement of military neutrals and non-aligned countries within the EU treaties and EU basic law. That must happen within the Constitution of our country also. This would be a hugely positive step forward and would add to the diplomatic repertoire and scope of the European Union.There is no doubt there are many challenges facing Europe. If we are true to our shared commitments and values, they can show what can be achieved through solidarity and resolve and they can improve our citizens’ lives. We remain committed to working with our European friends on these issues as we work for a better life for all our people. Seasann muid ag tráth athraithe san Eoraip. Is tráth dúshlánach é a chuireann deiseanna os ár gcomhair. Is am don rogha é freisin. Is féidir le todhchaí na hEorpa a bheith mar cheann de dhul chun cinn.We stand at a crossroads and we have decisions to make. The future of Europe can be one of retreat or one of hopeful progress; we must choose progress. It can be a future in which citizens can be disillusioned or empowered; we must choose empowerment. It can be a future of opportunities for the few at the top or a future of opportunity and prosperity for all; we must choose a race to the top. Now is the time to look forward to the future with ambition and hope. By working together we can build a new Ireland and reinvigorate the vision of Europe. We still believe we can make Ireland better. We still know we can help in making Europe better and we believe above all that, working together, we can make the world better too.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-30	---	1	The fiasco surrounding the delivery of the national children’s hospital continues. It is a saga that has rumbled on for two decades. We have already seen the cost for the hospital balloon and almost double. Despite all this investment, the children of Ireland still do not have their hospital. It was supposed to be open by 2014. Then it was August 2022. Now we are told it might open in mid-2024. Ten years after it was supposed to open, we still wait with real uncertainty, even around the 2024 date.If this debacle was not bad enough, this morning we woke to more worrying news. It is reported that the Department of Health seems to believe that there will be additional funding required from the Government and that it is bracing itself for a sharp increase in costs that will push the final bill beyond €2 billion.Remember that there are some 900 claims from the developers to tune of nearly €500 million which have not yet been resolved. This whole saga has been an exercise in kicking the can down the road and God only knows where all of this will end up.Years after planning was granted, nearly three decades since the idea the children’s hospital was first proposed, and after €1.1 billion has already been spent, the Government still does not know what the final cost will be, or when the hospital will be completed.Let me be very clear on this. Ireland needs its children’s hospital. It is a vital part of our national health infrastructure but it has not yet been delivered. We have witnessed an ongoing saga of bungles, incompetence and broken promises.Meanwhile, we have 100,000 children on hospital waiting lists. This includes children waiting for ear, nose and throat, ENT, treatment, dermatology care, and those children waiting in agony for scoliosis surgery. We know that delivery of the national children’s hospital would provide the capacity needed to get these kids off waiting lists and into theatres for their life-changing operations. Still, they wait and wait, the costs of the children’s hospital go up and up, and the delay goes on and on. If anything is emblematic of this Government's inability to forward-plan and deliver modern infrastructure on budget and on time, then surely the national children’s hospital is it.There has rightly been much focus on the Government's inability to build houses, but clearly, it is not very good at building hospitals either. The question people ask is this: who sets out to build anything, no less a national hospital, with no idea of how much it will cost and no idea when it will be finished.Leanann scannal ospidéal náisiúnta na leanaí ar aghaidh agus ar aghaidh. Caithfidh muid an costas deiridh a fháil. Cathain a bheidh an t-ospidéal críochnaithe agus cathain a bheidh sé oscailte?The Government and the Minister for Health need to get their acts together. We need clarity and answers. When will the Taoiseach get to grips with this debacle? What will the final cost of the national children’s hospital be and when will it be finished and operational?Taxpayers’ money.Whatever about it being disadvantageous for the Taoiseach to give a final figure of costs to the Dáil, let me tell the Taoiseach that it is wholly disadvantageous and unacceptable that the Government has set out on this project with a totally open-ended contract, playing advantage at every turn to the developer, such that we have spent €1.1 billion of taxpayers’ money.We have €500 million of developer claims outstanding and we have a Government, Taoiseach and Minister for Health with no notion of what the final bill will be. That is not accountability for taxpayer money and is certainly not a way to do business. Is it the Taoiseach's understanding that there will be a request for further funding for the children's hospital? When will it be made? Has he any notion what the quantum of it will be? I do not accept his answer that he cannot tell people how much this piece of infrastructure will cost, but can he tell us when it will be open and operational?Do not analyse my question. Give an answer.You did.Please do not point at me.Is have any notion of cost.When will it be?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-30	---	2	The programme for Government contains a promise to create a food ombudsman to protect farmers and consumers from unscrupulous behaviour on the part of powerful retailers and processors. Farmers had sought a regulator with real teeth to tackle the cartel-like behaviour of factories and others, particularly in the meat sector. The Government's draft Bill for an office for fairness and transparency was roundly criticised for lacking the necessary enforcement powers. The Minister promised that the new office would be in place by the end of 2021. That did not happen. He then promised it would be in place by summer 2022, but that did not happen either. This Bill went to Cabinet only yesterday. When will it be progressed and, crucially, will the Taoiseach give a commitment to positively consider the amendments Sinn Féin and others will bring forward to address the remaining deficiencies in the Bill and protect our family farmers and consumers in the market?It can still be on the west coast, though.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-30	---	3	What remedy is there to be?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-29	---	1	"Here we go again. With less than three weeks to go before the Taoiseach hands the keys of his office back to the Tánaiste, Deputy Varadkar, the Fine Gael Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, has opened the door to the return of big pay for top bankers. This move will pave the way for bumper pay increases for the top brass at bailed-out banks. We are talking about senior banking executives who already earn €500,000. It seems former Fine Gael Ministers who slipped out of government and into the roles of banking lobbyists have done their job very well.Nobody should be surprised because this is straight out of the Fine Gael playbook - delivering for those in high places while ordinary people struggle to make ends meet.This would be a bad call at any time, but there is something twisted about allowing big pay hikes for wealthy bankers while workers and families endure an unprecedented cost-of-living crisis. It is a real kick in the teeth for ordinary people.There was a segment on RTÉ radio this morning, which was absolutely heart-breaking. It contained interviews with people who now rely on food banks to ensure that they and their children get a decent meal. One woman spoke about how she will have to go into debt on household bills in order to ensure that her kids have a nice Christmas. Is that not an awful dilemma for any parent? However, that is the reality of what people are facing as Fine Gael prepares to resume leadership of the Government by looking after the top brass in the banks.We have all been here before. We have seen where gratuitous pay of bankers and the self-serving behaviour of big banks led us before. It led us to financial disaster, economic crash and social catastrophe. For the banks, it meant an enormous rescue package funded out of public moneys to the tune of €45 billion. For workers and families, it meant austerity. For the most vulnerable, it meant the most vicious of cuts. Fine Gael took away the respite care and bereavement grants and cut child benefit.After all the damage was done, did the banks learn their lesson? Did they hell. No, they did not. We only need to look at the tracker mortgage scandal, with thousands overcharged for their mortgages. Hundreds of people lost their homes and lives were destroyed as a result. Even when the banks were caught red-handed, they continued to do harm. This year alone, AIB and Bank of Ireland were fined over €197 million for regulatory breaches and actions that led to families losing their homes. The tracker mortgage scandal is not distant history; it happened in recent years. To this day, not one banker has been held accountable for this scandal.Buille uafásach is ea cinneadh an Aire, an Teachta Donohoe, chun pá mór a cheadú do bhaincéirí, d’oibrithe agus do theaghlaigh atá ag streachailt chun teacht i dtír. Níor cheart leis dul ar aghaidh. The Minister for Finance's decision is essentially to reward top bankers despite all the damage that was done. He is clearly completely out of touch with what ordinary people are going through. Fine Gael is clearly out of touch with all of that. My question is simple. Why is the Taoiseach going along with this? How can he defend it? How can he tell those struggling to heat their homes or put food on the table that a banker’s salary of €500,000 is not enough?I am sure that the Taoiseach’s new-found concern for the ordinary bank workers is very welcome. The banks are of course profitable and they should pay their staff correctly.The review states: ""In practice, the €500,000 pay cap applies to the few within the banks that hold the most senior management positions, such as the CEO and other senior executives"". The Taoiseach is proposing to remove that cap so do not create an alibi or hide behind ordinary bank clerks---------in a bid to defend the indefensible. I have put it to the Taoiseach on this specific matter that the removal of this pay cap, as though €500,000 is not enough for a senior banker, Fine Gael, true to form, wants to bust through that and go back to the bad old days when bankers could earn obscene amounts of money in their salary and obscene bonuses. The culture has not changed one iota within the Irish banking system. I have asked the Taoiseach on that issue how he stands behind that. How does he defend that? This is the Fine Gael Minister for Finance’s last throw of the dice in favour of the very wealthy and the overpaid, while ordinary people struggle.Can the Taoiseach answer my question?I have asked the Taoiseach about the €500,000.What banker requires €500,000?Can the Taoiseach clarify what banker requires €500,000?He is clearly not answering my question.It would be nice if the Taoiseach answered the question."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-23	---	1	I also extend a very warm fáilte to our friends and guests. They are most welcome.I recently met with 12-year-old Cara Darmody from Tipperary. I know the Taoiseach also met Cara in July. Cara is an amazing young person who campaigns tirelessly for better autism services for her brothers Neil and John and for so many other children failed by the system. Cara spoke to the Oireachtas committee two weeks ago. She said:My brothers Neil and John have been treated disgracefully and I am here to stand up for them. I am also here to stand up for the almost 18,000 children who have been left to rot on waiting lists.Cara’s family has been through a nightmare, fighting to get proper services for her brother, Neil, in particular, an experience her father, Mark, describes as “horrific, humiliating, and inhumane.” Neil is ten years old. In 2016, he was diagnosed as having a mild to moderate autism spectrum disorder. In 2020, with little progress or development, Neil was referred to a HSE child psychiatrist who was adamant that his disability was, in fact, severe. The psychiatrist’s recommendation was that Neil be re-assessed. Despite this recommendation being sent to three separate HSE managers, it was never actioned. Two years on, Neil has still not been re-assessed and has not received the services he needs.Mark says he was told that Neil will be on a waiting list “indefinitely” but the local children’s disability team refused to put that in writing. No explanation has been given. Mark has made numerous complaints to the HSE but he has been stone-walled and the family is being ignored.The impact on Neil’s development has been catastrophic. He bites and punches himself all day. The child is non-verbal. He needs to be brought on long drives to calm down. He has to sleep with his parents every night. Mark, his dad, says the lack of intervention has done his son irreparable damage. By contrast, his brother John has shown real progress. John received earlier intervention after the Darmodys paid for him to be assessed privately.The pressure on this family is immense. Both children need full-time care, which has resulted in the loss of employment for both parents.Ní hamháin go bhfuil Cara Darmody ag seasamh suas dá deartháir, Neil. Tá sí ag seasamh an fhóid do na mílte páiste atá ar liostaí feithimh míchumais.Neil’s story is shocking but it is not unique. In fact, I spoke to families in Waterford last night who are in a very similar situations. As Cara said, there are more than 18,000 children on waiting lists just for initial contact with a children’s disability team. Thousands more are going without the services they need. There are 2,500 children whose assessments are overdue. More than a quarter of children’s disability posts are vacant, equating to over 480,000 lost therapy hours. This is a result of a failure to plan and invest in the specialised workforce and in services for children with disabilities.Cara told the Oireachtas committee: “I am sick of adults who just talk. Why can you all not do something about this and stop the damage being done to children with disabilities?” What Neil urgently requires is a psychometric assessment, as recommended by his consultant psychiatrist. This is necessary to ensure that he is in the right school and that he gets the health and educational services he needs. When will Neil get his assessment?There is undoubtedly a big problem in recruitment and retention of those therapists and specialists, as the Taoiseach stated. Much of the difficulty is self-inflicted by the Government and the HSE. If they are not prepared to pay and reward people in terms of their take-home pay and their pension entitlements in line with statutory standards, they will have a problem recruiting and holding onto staff.I asked the Taoiseach about Neil specifically. He has given me a general and global picture. I know how bad it is out there. My God, every family dealing with this knows how deep the nightmare and the quagmire are. I asked him about this ten-year-old child, however. Two years ago, a consultant psychiatrist said the child needs to be reassessed because he is not on the mild spectrum; he is, in fact, profound and severe. He bites himself all day. The household is chaotic. The child needs constant care and is not getting the services he needs but he has not even been reassessed and the HSE is stonewalling the family. That is a fact. I asked the Taoiseach when will Neil get his assessment. I would like an answer to that question, particularly since as the Taoiseach stated, he met the family directly last July.The Government was breaking the law.The HSE was breaking the law.Neil has not had his reassessment.The child has not been reassessed.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-23	---	2	Dr. Gabriel Scally will today outline the recommendations of the CervicalCheck report that have yet to be implemented in full. The lack of urgency and the foot-dragging of the Government in delivering legislation on open disclosure and ensuring the return of testing to Ireland, and the effect this has had on the women concerned, are unforgivable. The Taoiseach gave a commitment last week, following the death of Vicky Phelan, that open disclosure legislation would be amended to cover the incidents that led to the CervicalCheck scandal and then passed by the end of the year. A week has gone by and there has been no progress. In fact, the HSE is talking about meetings between the Chief Medical Officer, CMO, and the Minister happening in the next couple of weeks. That is far too slow. We only have three sitting weeks left before we rise for Christmas. I ask the Taoiseach to intervene to ensure the necessary meetings happen this week, we have the amendment and we are in a position to put the open disclosure legislation on the Statute Book before we rise for Christmas, as the Taoiseach committed to doing last week.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-22	---	1	"I will not go on until 11 o'clock, by way of reassurance.You are very welcome. People woke up this morning to the latest Daft.ie rental report. It confirms what everyone knows. The report shows the biggest hike in new rents since records began - a staggering surge of 14% in one year. It is a new, grim record achieved on the watch of the Taoiseach's Government. What does this mean for hard-pressed renters? Across the State it means an average monthly rent of over €1,600. In the Taoiseach's neck of the woods, renters in Cork city will fork out over €1,700 a month. Get this - in this city, Dublin, it means paying an average monthly rent of €2,258, or a staggering €28,000 a year. Has the Taoiseach read this report? It is just off the wall. Who can afford to pay these insane amounts of money? The answer is very few. Very soon, only the very well-off will be able to live in our cities.The teaching unions today issued a statement. They say our education system is at risk because schools are finding it increasingly difficult to recruit teachers because of this housing crisis. Working people cannot afford to rent. Working people cannot afford to buy. Social housing delivery is nowhere near what is needed. While this situation worsens, the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, who is completely out of his depth, says we do not have a housing emergency and the Tánaiste wrongly tells young people that the grass is not greener and they will not find lower rents abroad. In fact, they will. The Taoiseach comes in here every week and tells us the Government's housing policy is working.Well, it is not. The housing policy of this Government should be about delivery, but instead we get denial, delusion and desperation. The record rent hike was entirely foreseeable. The writing was on the wall. We told the Government the credit for renters included in its budget was not enough. We told the Government that to really protect renters it also needed to ban rent increases. Each time the Government's answer was ""No"".We also repeatedly warned the Taoiseach that the Government's targets for the delivery of cost rental homes are too low, and it is not even meeting those low targets. Now, we hear that commencement rates for housing construction have dropped significantly, putting housing targets for next year in real jeopardy. If this was not bad enough, a Government memo has confirmed a housing underspend of almost half a billion euro in the middle of Ireland's worst ever housing crisis. It is scandalous.Faoin Rialtas seo, tá an t-ardú cíosa is mó riamh againn ach fós deireann an tAire, an Teachta Darragh O’Brien, nach bhfuil éigeandáil tithíochta againn. Tá sé in am i gcomhair gnímh. Caithfidh an Rialtas cosc a chur ar arduithe cíosa ar feadh trí bliana.The Taoiseach says housing is the number one priority for this Government, but the crisis in people's lives puts that claim to shame. The Government acts as if rip-off rents are a figment of people’s imagination. Now the chickens of its inaction have come home to roost and it is renters who pay a heavy price. What is the Taoiseach's answer to renters across Ireland who are fleeced by these outrageous rent hikes? Does this record rent increase now convince him that we do, in fact, have a housing emergency? Will he finally do what is necessary and ban rent increases for three years?As the Taoiseach announced the latest Housing for All, there was an emergency and there is still an emergency - in fact, a more profound emergency. As we speak today, house prices and rents are up and, very sadly, we will hear again that the rates of homelessness are up. The way in which the Taoiseach tries to dodge and evade answering questions by pointing to others, as though he was not the Taoiseach - and I know he has limited time left but he is still the Head of Government - as though he was not the Government and did not carry the responsibility to tackle this emergency, is quite astounding. There will be fewer than 500 cost rental homes this year. That is all. It is good news for those who have those tenancies - let me state that plainly - but it is not enough. That is fact. The report published this morning says it all. The average cost of renting in this city this year is €28,000.I asked the Taoiseach whether he will ban rent increases----------for the next three years and he did not answer that question. I would appreciate it if he would answer that question.It is Daft.ie. I hardly think that is propagandist, in fairness.Is Daft.ie cynical too?You have no answer, Micheál. That is okay; I understand."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-16	---	1	The housing emergency has dominated life in Ireland for more than a decade. It is a story of an entire generation locked out of affordable housing and locked out of opportunity. It is a generation that works hard and does all the right things but still sees their aspirations pushed further away. Their lives are on hold and their futures are uncertain.Over the past four days, I have received an outpouring of despair from people whose crisis housing situation is badly affecting their mental health. Here is just some of what these people had to say.Amy told me:I'm a [40]-year-old married nurse. We couldn't afford [to] rent anymore. We’ve had to move in with my parents to try to save for a mortgage, but [now] the cost of living [crisis] has ruined things. Only for my parents I couldn't afford to continue living. I am constantly sad and stressed.This is Seán’s story:I’m with my partner of over six years. We are living at home with our parents and sister in a three-[bedroom] house. No room. We want to have kids but where would we put a baby? This is not a life. We both work full time and pay our taxes. We want to start our life, but we can't. My depression is real and it's only getting worse.Kevin said:Myself and [my] partner are in counselling and prescribed medication for stress, depression and anxiety due to the rising prices of houses and [the struggle] to make a life while [we are still] living [with] our parents. We’re considering moving to Canada for a chance at a better life.Edel said:I’ve been homeless since the start of 2020. Going from house to house, room to room. We’ve lost our furniture, our clothing, and the feeling of having a home again. I’m mentally exhausted and the whole family has been dealing with tough mental health issues. This isn't normal. [This] is not right.There is stress, anxiety, depression, medication and a housing Minister who said that we do not have a housing emergency. The Taoiseach said that his housing plan is working. He speaks of indicators of success, but each of these stories is an indicator of the Government's housing failure. I have put it to him time and again that the Government's housing targets are too low, but each time he refused to accept this fact. The Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage has now acknowledged that the targets are wholly inadequate. Finally, last night, the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O’Brien, was forced to admit that the Government has been working to housing targets that are no where near what is needed. The truth is that this Government falls far short on planning and delivery and people are paying a heavy price. Tá an éigeandáil tithíochta ag cur isteach go mór ar mheabhairshláinte go leor daoine anois. Teastaíonn freagairt éigeandála a dhéileálann le scála na géarchéime.The Taoiseach said housing is the number one issue for his Government. Yet, after two and half years in office, the housing emergency has only got worse. House prices, rents and homelessness are up and now people’s mental health is on the floor. That is the legacy of the Government’s housing plan.Does the Taoiseach now accept that we have a housing emergency? When will we see housing targets that match the actual scale of this emergency? We need energy, pace and an all-of-government approach to fix housing.It is a measure of how far astray the Government has gone and how badly it is failing that the Taoiseach relies on misinformation and attacks across the floor----------rather than acknowledging in the first instance the very real mental health consequences of what is a housing catastrophe and emergency. The Minister cannot even accept that it is an emergency. Does the Taoiseach accept that it is an emergency?The record of the Government, despite the Taoiseach's bluster, is that house prices, rents and homelessness are up. I will try to be of some assistance to the Taoiseach by telling him that the answer to this catastrophe is not to produce houses and accommodation that are way out of the reach and price range of ordinary and average workers. The answer is not to incentivise and roll out the red carpet to international funds, vulture or cuckoo funds, call them what you will funds----------that build big, fancy apartment blocks in areas such as those I represent. People with no homes look at those apartment blocks, say they are nice and that they will never live in them because they cannot afford to do so and certainly will never own a home there. That is not the answer.I asked about the targets. Can we please have clarity on that matter?The targets are wrong, according to the Department and the Minister.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-16	---	2	Figures given to our health spokesperson, Deputy Cullinane, indicate there were 260 chemotherapy appointments cancelled in quarter 3 of this year. One hundred and sixty of these appointments were for children. What is the Government's plan to ensure these children and thousands more in need of appointments get the care they need when they need it?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-11-15	---	1	"Vicky said, ""The hardest part for me, it's not the dying, it's the leaving my children behind. That's what breaks my heart."" Yesterday, at just past midnight, Vicky's battle with terminal cervical cancer ended, her young life ended, her life stolen by a vicious disease, her life stolen by profound failures of the State, of Government and of the HSE. Enormous and endless tributes flow now for this remarkable, irreplaceable woman. She was a study in resilience, determination and grace under pressure. No words of mine will fully capture the depth of her courage or of her love.No words will fully capture the scale of devastation at her loss for Jim, Amelia, Darragh, Gaby, John and all those who loved her dearly. Ireland has lost one of its brightest stars in the firmament of noble women Ireland. Ireland must not forget. Ireland must change. Safe, respectful healthcare for mná na hÉireann was Vicky's battle cry. Let it echo from the rooftops. The women of Ireland thank you, Vicky. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a h-anam."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-15	---	2	Yesterday the sad news broke that Vicky Phelan had passed away. Her two children, Amelia and Darragh have lost their beautiful mother so early in their lives. Our hearts go out to her husband Jim, to her heartbroken parents, Gaby and John, and to Vicky's family and friends who are devastated by her death. The nation mourns with them.Vicky Phelan was a force of nature. In pursuit of justice she was fearless and relentless. She was unstoppable. If it was not for Vicky's courage, the CervicalCheck scandal may never have been exposed. With inspiring dignity Vicky took on the State that had failed her so badly. It was a battle she should never have had to fight but fight it she did until her very last breath. Vicky endured her illness and she never backed down in campaigning for the women and girls of Ireland. Her legacy will live on. We owe her so much.Vicky, as has been said, did not want fame or adulation; she wanted purposeful change. The best way to honour Vicky's memory is to complete the work she did. That means bringing the testing of screening samples back to Ireland. Testing continues to be outsourced to labs in the United States at the centre of the CervicalCheck scandal. Currently, 85% of CervicalCheck sample testing is outsourced abroad. The national cervical screening laboratory was due to open in September, yet the women of Ireland are still waiting.Completing the work also means delivering the long-promised legislation for open disclosure. The Scally review recommended a statutory duty of candour be established to ensure people are told the truth when something goes wrong in their healthcare. Yet, incredibly, the Patient Safety (Notifiable Patient Safety Incidents) Bill published by the Government in 2019 would not cover disclosure of the incidents at the heart of the CervicalCheck scandal. We in Sinn Féin have proposed amendments to rectify this issue but the Minister, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, has for seven months failed to progress the legislation. Again, the women of Ireland have been left waiting. We must also see the reinstatement of the cancer audit review of screening, which was suspended four and a half years ago.It is the wish of Vicky’s family that these specific issues be raised today because she cared so passionately about this change. Everyone in the Dáil is committed to ensuring that we never again see the failures of the CervicalCheck scandal. We will have to work together to deliver the change that Vicky wanted to see.Is é an bealach is fearr chun ómós a thabhairt do chuimhne Vicky ná scagthástáil a thabhairt ar ais go hÉirinn agus reachtaíocht a chur i bhfeidhm i gcomhair nochta oscailte. We are all waiting for the national cervical screening laboratory to open. When will this happen? Will the Taoiseach ensure that on its opening, it has the capacity to test all cervical screens conducted in this State? When will the Minister for Health progress the open disclosure legislation? That legislation must be amended to ensure it covers the type of incidents at the centre of the CervicalCheck scandal. The law must provide for open disclosure. Vicky Phelan was very clear. She said:I want action. I want change. I want accountability.Let us get this done together for Vicky, for all the women we have lost and for those women who continue to suffer and fight for justice.I support the Taoiseach's comments regarding the importance of population screening and the importance for women to participate in CervicalCheck. All of us who avail of the service are well aware of its absolute value.Vicky’s ambition to bringing screening home can be achieved. It was a catastrophic error for the laboratory services not to be available and for screening not to be carried out in this jurisdiction. I want to put that on the record. Can the Taoiseach assure us that when the national laboratory opens - and he says he hopes this will happen by the end of the year - that it will not just be additional capacity but that we work for sufficient capacity that screening in its entirety can happen here in Ireland?On open disclosure legislation, can we just confirm today that we will get this done by the end of the year, namely, before we rise for Christmas? Can the Dáil agree that we will get this done rather than speculating or giving speculative target deadlines? Can we agree that we will work together for that happening?I asked the Taoiseach about the cancer audit review and its reinstatement. Will he say something on that matter?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-09	---	1	Last night during a debate with Sinn Féin's Deputy Ó Broin, the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy O'Brien, claimed that we do not have a housing emergency. It was incredible stuff and, therefore, I will share with the Taoiseach just some of the hundreds of accounts from people who have been in touch with us in the past 24 hours - victims of the housing emergency.Christopher tells us:I'm living in rental accommodation. I work full time in the defence forces, my partner works part time as we cannot afford full time childcare. Will never ever be able to afford a house with prices this high. At my wit's end. I genuinely have to hold back tears some days out of pure frustration at the state of things.Tracy tells us:I Had to take an overdraft so I can pay the mortgage every month. I can't afford oil for heating. We’re ripped off. I’m considering moving to New Zealand.Christine story is as follows:I got 6 months’ notice to leave after 9 years renting. I’ve 4 ... [children all] under 10. I've been on the housing list for several years. Council ... [tell] me there are no houses and to start asking ... family. I’m so stressed I’ve had to go on medication. I work hard. I feel so let down. My heart is broken thinking my ... [children] might not have a home.Aoife tells us:Myself, my husband & 3 kids have lived with my mother for nearly 5 years now. We make too much money for social housing and WAY too little to own our own home. Our only hope would be affordable housing. We couldn’t afford to rent. We feel like our lives have been on hold for so long now. We pay all our taxes and bills. We truly are the working poor & hidden homeless.Cillian says:I am 28 years old, ... [I live] in a house-share. I have a good job, ... [but] at this age I [had] hoped to my own place. The house I’m in is overcrowded and damp. I hate going home ...[from] work, but I have no prospect of finding a nicer place. I’m very much considering moving away for a better life. I know [there are] people are worse off than me, but my current situation is [so] depressing.Kate tells us:We’re back living with my parents along with two children. We are saving for a house, but prices are crazy. We both have good jobs but [we are] not massive earners. When my dad was diagnosed with cancer in September, we considered moving out and renting again to give my parents space. 17 applications were sent and not one response! My eldest child is so insecure about not having our own house and it causes huge worries for him and us.There the Taoiseach has it. This is just a small sample of the real stories of Government's collective failure in housing - a father is close to tears every day; a mother on medication to cope with the stress; young people feeling depressed and looking to emigrate; children wracked with anxiety and fear; and families living in a state of panic. Deir an Taoiseach nach éigeandáil tithíochta í seo ach ní thagann an tuairim sin le fíorscéal na ndaoine. The claim made that this is not a housing emergency is painfully out of touch with the reality of people’s lives. If this is not a disaster, what is it? If this is not a social catastrophe, what is it? If this is not a housing emergency - as the Minister claims - what is it?The highest rents, highest house prices and highest levels of homelessness - that is the reality of the Government's record.Here is Karen, who is in her early 20s. She says she has been with her boyfriend for six years and they are still living with parents in a box room. They just want to start their own life and are just waiting for something to get better. It is so hard, she says. Michael says:We are a working family with 2 children. Renting for 21 years. We’ve been given a notice of termination. We have no idea where we are going next. We can't afford to buy, and we can't afford to rent. We are not even eligible for council housing since we are above threshold. The future is so unsure.Does the Taoiseach accept that this is a catastrophe? Does he accept that we are living through a housing emergency? If, like his Minister, he does not accept that, it would go a very long way to explaining the Government's abject failure to meet the housing needs of people. I will ask the Taoiseach a straight question. I have given him just a sample of the stories. This is a housing emergency, is it not?The Taoiseach is not going to put roofs over people's heads.Your Minister-----
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-11-08	---	1	"Speaking on ""Morning Ireland"" last Thursday, the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Michael McGrath, conceded that the Government will not meet its housing targets for this year. He stated:In relation to direct social housing building, the target for 2022 is 9,000. ... We do not believe at this juncture that 9,000 will be met.I take it that he stands over that comment. His remarks at least shed some reality, in contrast with the assertions made by the Taoiseach and the housing Minister that the Government is on track and its housing policies are working.Despite the Taoiseach's repeated refrain that housing is the single biggest social issue facing the Government, what we see is failure to plan and failure to deliver. The Government promised 9,000 social homes this year. By the end of June, it had delivered only 1,765. It promised 4,100 affordable homes this year. It has delivered only 925 to date. This means the Government will miss its social and affordable housing targets for the third year in a row. Those are targets, by the way, that do not come close to meeting the level of housing need in society. In addition, the Government refused to introduce a ban on rent increases. These are rents that are crippling tenants, are at record levels and are continuing to rise. Meanwhile, homelessness is at an historic high. Even with the ban on evictions, it is likely to rise. Child homelessness has increased by a staggering 51% since April 2021. It beggars belief that any member of the Government could claim its housing policies are working. Does the Minister, Deputy McGrath, accept not alone that the Government is missing its targets but, in fact, that its entire approach to housing has failed?To make matters worse, we hear the Government is €2 billion behind in its annual housing spending in its capital spend. That is not likely to change in the next six weeks. That means €2 billion sitting there while people watch housing prices go through the roof and know they have no chance of affording their own homes, while young mothers and fathers and their children squeeze into the box rooms of their own parents' homes and while families languish for years and years on council housing waiting lists. People caught up in the never-ending housing crisis will be shocked and angered by this. It highlights again that the Government is incapable of bringing the required urgency to deliver the homes that are needed.We now see young people voting with their feet when it comes to housing. Young people throughout Ireland are leaving because they cannot put a secure, affordable roof over their heads. It is now time to deliver. Conas go bhfuil an Rialtas ag tarraingt na gcos le €2 billiún de chaiteachas tithíochta i lár géarchéime tithíochta nach bhfacthas riamh roimhe? Seo géarchéim ina bhfuil ár ndaoine óga ag fágáil na tíre i gcomhair seans le saol níos fearr a bheith acu thar lear.The Minister is in charge of public expenditure. He holds the purse strings. How is sitting on €2 billion for housing happening when so many people are in desperate and unprecedented housing need? How can the Government claim it is doing everything it can to end the housing crisis, while sitting on this huge sum of money? It is failure to plan, failure to deliver and, by the Minister's own acceptance and admissions, failure to meet what are at best low-level targets. Fail, fail, fail.I noticed the glee on the Government benches as Members congratulated themselves on housing delivery. The Taoiseach was in attendance at one of those great launches, at which one of the families who got the keys to their home had been on a social housing waiting list for 14 years. That is a generation. That is the time it takes to raise a family. As we meet and speak here, there are families, as I said to the Minister earlier, who are raising their children in the box rooms of their parents' homes. There are kids and families in bed and breakfast accommodation, hotels and so on. There is a sense of desperation everywhere.I asked the Minister about the undershoot of €2 billion in respect of capital spend on housing the Government is sitting on. How in the name of God is the Government falling €2 billion short on its spend on housing and sitting on that €2 billion in circumstances in which people have been on housing lists for a decade and more, living in hotels and bed and breakfast accommodation and desperate, with no real prospects? That needs to be explained by the Minister."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-10-26	---	1	Rishi Sunak enters No. 10 Downing Street at a time of real strain between our two islands. That strain is caused by the Tory Government's orchestrated undermining of the Good Friday Agreement and its persistent attacks on the protocol. This self-serving agenda has seeped into the stability of Government and power-sharing in the North. The Tories facilitated the DUP in using the protocol as pretext for its boycott of the political institutions following last May's election. The appointment of a new British Prime Minister can bring an opportunity for a real step change in how Britain engages with Ireland and with our European partners. This can be a chance for a fresh start. The question is whether it will be.We need to see relationships based on good faith and a genuine desire for real progress. For our part, we have contacted Downing Street seeking a meeting with Mr. Sunak as soon as possible. The new Prime Minister must put a focus and energy into ensuring the implementation of the protocol, the ironing out of outstanding issues and getting the Executive in the North back up and running. The protocol is widely supported. It is working. Of course, if can work better and we want to see that happen sooner rather than later. Time is of the essence. The six-month deadline to form an Administration expires on Friday. Sinn Féin stands ready to form an Executive for all and ready to work with others to shape a better future. It is with this objective in mind that the assembly will sit tomorrow.Our message to the DUP is clear. It must end its boycott, join with us and work with us together in an Executive to tackle the cost of living, fix the health service and make people's lives better. Caithfidh aontachtas a thuiscint nach ionann blocáil an fheidhmeannaigh i mBéal Feirste agus riail dhíreach ó Londain. Is é an t-aon rogha eile ná socrú údaráis idir Stát na hÉireann agus stát na Breataine. Political unionism must understand that wrecking the institutions of Government will not usher in direct rule from London. If the restoration of the Executive in Belfast is blocked indefinitely by the DUP, the only alternative will be an arrangement of joint authority between the Irish State and the British state. This is in line with the position taken in 2006 by the Irish and British Governments when facing a deadlock situation. Fractured relationships serve nobody. We need partnership and a commitment to make politics work in the interests of the people.I know the Taoiseach will speak with the new British Prime Minister this evening. I very much hope the Dáil can maintain a unified stance on the important matters ahead. I have no doubt he will make clear to Mr. Sunak that the British Government is a co-guarantor of the Good Friday Agreement and must play a constructive role in implementing the protocol through a negotiated settlement. No doubt the Taoiseach will make clear that the North's democratic institutions must be restored as a matter of priority and, in the event they are not, that direct rule from London is off the table. Have those in the Irish Government engaged with their British counterparst to prepare for joint authority arrangements should the formation of an Executive continue to be blocked? Can the Taoiseach tell us what stage those preparations are at?I have absolutely no doubt Europe is ready and, indeed, has been ready and has shown remarkable flexibility in dealing with the issues of concern around the protocol. Just to reiterate, the protocol is widely supported and it is working, as the Taoiseach has attested to and has witnessed from his conversations with various sectors north of the Border. I, too, hope we get to a position where we have a functioning Executive, a First Minister for all and a functioning assembly. That is where this needs to land. However, it is essential everybody understands that the alternative to that is not a return to direct rule from London. We need to be very upfront and frank with our unionist colleagues in that regard. Will the Taoiseach elaborate, in the minute he has available, on the British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference, that partnership relationship, and how he envisages that functioning in the event there is a failure on the part of political unionism to help us re-establish the Executive and to have a functioning assembly?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-10-26	---	2	There were 669 people on hospital trolleys yesterday, 28 of whom were children. This is the highest ever level of hospital overcrowding for the month of October. Some 15 hospitals across the State did not have a single bed available. My colleague, Deputy Cullinane, has information showing that the average wait in an emergency department this year is nearly 13 hours. It is nearly 15 hours for those aged over 75. As the Taoiseach will know, the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation, INMO, has repeatedly warned of a catastrophic winter for our hospitals, so this crisis was entirely foreseeable. The big question is, where is the plan and the action needed from the Minister for Health? Where is the plan for emergency departments he promised last April? Where is the multi-annual plan for tackling hospital waiting lists the Minister promised more than 18 months ago? Why are these plans lying on the Minister's desk while our people are lying on trolleys?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-10-25	---	1	This week sees yet another disaster in Government housing policy as workers and families across Ireland continue to endure a worsening housing crisis and those fleeing a terrible war in Ukraine were left to sleep in Dublin Airport because there was no accommodation for them. Last March, the Taoiseach said the State would accommodate 200,000 Ukrainian refugees but he had no real plan as to how he would meet that commitment. The Irish people have welcomed some 60,000 refugees from Ukraine and the system is already overwhelmed. On Friday next, the latest homelessness figures are to be published and all indicators suggest that we will see another shameful increase in people in emergency accommodation. Meanwhile an entire generation is locked out of affordable housing and opportunity. They weigh up the prospect of life from Boston, Perth or Toronto.All the strands of this social catastrophe are linked by the Government’s failure to plan, organise and ultimately its failure to deliver. There is no doubt that the Government is top of the class at when it comes to announcing big targets that grab the headlines. It gets an A+ on that score. But time and again it falls short when it comes to delivery. This failure to plan and deliver means we now see crisis heaped upon crisis. We see massive pressure heaped onto a housing system that is already broken beyond recognition. And this means that everyone loses. You lose if you have spent years desperately searching for an affordable home and you also lose if you come here to this country fleeing a terrible war in search of shelter and help. So people are now frustrated. They asked how on earth it is that nine months after Russia invaded Ukraine, the Government is now scrambling to put together a plan. How is it that the Government is appealing to the public for help but at the same time, people's offers to accommodate refugees are being ignored? It seems that the Government’s approach was to outsource the State's response, cross its fingers and hope for the best. What people see is the same incompetence and infuriating lack of pace that the Government has brought to addressing the domestic housing crisis. Not content with denying our own people the right to an affordable, secure roof over their heads, the Government now extends its catastrophic failure to those coming to Ireland seeking humanitarian assistance.De thairbhe theip an Rialtais tabhairt faoi phleanáil, tá an ghéarchéim tithíochta imithe in olcas agus an Stát faoi bhrú lóistín a sholáthar dóibh siúd atá ag éalú ón chogadh. Cuireann an teip seo géarchéim ar ghéarchéim agus brú ollmhór ar chóras atá briste.People are sick of the Government's excuses for its failures in housing. It claims that housing is its number-one priority but it is now time to back up those words with what matters: delivery. We all know there is a housing shortage but what is the Government doing to ensure offers of accommodation for those fleeing war will come on stream quickly? The outsourcing system is not fit for purpose. When will we see a change in Government housing policy to ensure members of the locked-out generation can finally put an affordable and secure roof over their heads?There is no need to convince anyone of either the vile criminal actions of Vladimir Putin or the incredible generosity and warmth that has been displayed by the Irish people. Those are objective matters of fact. The difficulty is that the Taoiseach has not matched the effort by the Irish people with Government action.That is the reality here. The facts, as reported and acknowledged by everyone bar the Taoiseach, are that people fleeing from Ukraine arrived and there was nowhere for them to go. They slept in the airport. There was talk of some perhaps being left homeless and having to sleep on the streets. We can all agree that is not an acceptable situation. I have asked the Taoiseach to set out for us what the Government response will be to that.People are well used to the Government and the housing crisis that people have lived through for a decade and longer, and now we have crisis upon crisis. What is the Taoiseach's answer in respect of these individuals arriving?Why is he only cobbling together a plan now?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-10-19	---	1	"Last night, Sinn Féin brought a motion before the Dáil calling on the Government to ensure that households are protected from electricity and gas disconnection this winter. Our motion proposes a ban on disconnections now instead of waiting until December as the Government's plan suggests. It would provide desperately needed protection and certainty for the hundreds of thousands of households using pre-paid meters. The Government has stated it will not oppose the motion and this is to be welcomed.Those struggling to pay their energy bills need urgent action now to implement these measures without delay. It is nearly three weeks since the Taoiseach stated nobody would be disconnected this winter, including households using pre-paid meters. As the Taoiseach knows, I welcomed it at the time. Since then, I and others have asked the Taoiseach repeatedly for his plan to deliver on this commitment but he has not provided an answer. Instead, we hear that the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, is to publish a plan in the coming weeks. Those struggling to pay their electricity bills do not have the luxury of weeks. They are in trouble now.As we speak, more than 200,000 households are in electricity arrears. The fear of disconnection is very real and very present for them. This will only get worse as people scramble to keep up with the soaring cost of living. The October bills are arriving now. They are landing like a body blow. I spoke to a woman last night who told me that the heart was put crossways in her when she saw her bill. She said she felt winded. That is how she described it.People work hard all day but are afraid to turn on the lights when they come home. Parents worry that they will be disconnected and that their children will not have light to do their homework. Many families using prepaid meters are forced to have dark days and to ration their electricity. This is where it is at for so many people. Asking these households to wait on the never-never for the Government's plan is not good enough. They need the Government to act now to ensure every single household is protected from disconnection. This has to include those using pre-paid meters.I have said before to the Taoiseach but let me repeat that there is a simple solution to what is a big problem. Some pre-paid companies already have disconnection bans in place at weekends and some public holidays. This ban should be extended to provide these households with 24-7 protection until the end of March. The Taoiseach needs to grasp this solution. Do not leave people waiting and waiting with unimaginable stress. Ní mór teaghlaigh a chosaint ó dhícheangal fuinnimh an geimhreadh seo. Caithfidh an Rialtas cosc ar dhícheangal a thabhairt isteach anois agus cinntiú go n-áirítear iad siúd a úsáideann méadair íoc-mar-a-úsáidtear.I want the Taoiseach to follow up on the decision not to oppose our motion and to deliver for these households. This means a ban on disconnections starting immediately. It means including those on pre-pay meters now and providing them with an absolute assurance that they will not be disconnected. Yesterday, I said sincerely to the Taoiseach that we will work with the Government to get the eviction ban in place as quickly as possible. We need the same urgency and willingness to work together to ensure no household is disconnected this winter.The difficulty lies in the Taoiseach's statement that the Minister ""will continue to engage"". I am very concerned that there is not a sense of pace in the Taoiseach's response to this situation, which is one of incredible stress and worry for hundreds of thousands of families throughout the land. The Taoiseach's concern about people falling into debt is understandable but I need to say that a far greater concern for those using prepaid meters is that they will not have supply to their homes.We need to deal with that as a matter of urgency. As I said, many prepay companies already allow protection on weekends and specific public holidays. The best and most straightforward way to deal with this matter is to extend that protection on a 24-7 basis. The Minister does not need to hold endless rounds of meeting with people to arrive at that conclusion. I appeal to the Taoiseach as a matter of urgency to adopt that position and to approach those companies and tell them we need this ban in place now.Unbelievable."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-10-19	---	2	I do not know if the Taoiseach heard the voices of the thousands of students who last Thursday took part in a walk-out protest against the Government's failure to tackle the student accommodation crisis. I do not know if he heard their experiences of the impossibility of finding any accommodation, the real pressure of this cost-of-living crisis, impossible and crazy commutes for so many students and a feeling they are not getting the full educational experience they are entitled to. Last Thursday, students stood up not just for themselves but for the future of education in Ireland. They walked out to stand up, and fair play to them. On their behalf, I ask the Taoiseach when the Government will respond to this crisis, what it proposes to do and how it will invest in college accommodation, in particular, college-owned beds. The plans are there and what has been lacking so far have been the resources and political will.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-10-18	---	1	"The raw and human impact of the housing crisis was laid bare in heartbreaking fashion on RTÉ last night. With great courage and dignity, Graham King told how he and his family live in a tent. They have nowhere else to go. His wife, Patricia, and his two children, Grayson and Priya, stay in the tent. He stays in the car. They live day to day. Graham said:I’m on disability and half carer's. My wife works. We have to run a car and feed kids. The expenses add up.Speaking about the conditions in the tent and how his children are coping, he said:It was a game at first. It’s not so much anymore. The last couple of nights haven’t been good. Wind, rain - that type of weather has already destroyed one tent. This one is holding up, but I don’t know how long it will last. I haven't got much sleep because I still have to be looking after the tent when the rest of them are sleeping in it.About his children, he said, ""[The children] know they're homeless but they don't know the meaning of what that entails"" and that they cope by occupying themselves. There are playgrounds nearby and a walkway, and they feed the ducks,For more than a decade, Governments have been telling people that they will fix housing, yet here we are with a father on national television telling his family's story of living in a tent in Ireland in 2022. The Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, had no answers for Graham. He and his family are still in that tent today. It is day 53 for them. Incredibly, the family have been told that they earn too much to qualify for State housing support. I have no doubt that viewers last night were looking on with a sense of, ""There but for the grace of God go I"", a feeling that this could happen to anyone, especially in light of extortionate rents, record levels of homelessness and a maxed out emergency accommodation system. Last Wednesday, in Dublin 7 in my constituency, for example, all emergency shelters bar one were full.When a working family, a family trying to do everything right, ends up living in a tent, it is surely a sign that the system is broken beyond recognition. For months, Sinn Féin and others have been calling on the Government to introduce a winter eviction ban to halt the flow of people into homelessness. I welcome the fact that it seems the Government has finally listened and will proceed with a ban. It is a first step. This measure must coincide with an accelerated delivery of affordable homes, tackling crisis rents, increasing income thresholds for social housing and an urgent plan to bring vacant homes into use. In the here and now, though, we must ensure that the eviction ban is done right. Cuirim fáilte roimh an gcosc geimhridh ar dhíshealbhú mar chéad chéim chun tabhairt faoi ghéarchéim na ndaoine gan dídean. Caithfidh an Rialtas é a fháil i gceart gan aon mhoill. There are concerns that the eviction ban may not be introduced until December. That would be far too late. Such a delay would result in hundreds more adults and children being forced into homelessness but if we work together, we can pass the right legislation very quickly to prevent this from happening. Will the Government do that? Will it ensure that the winter ban on evictions is implemented without any further delay?There is no disputing that the housing crisis is the single biggest social crisis we face. It is also true that it is the single biggest failure of the Government and its predecessors. The alternative, of course, to being evicted is not being evicted. The alternative to being homeless is to have a roof over one's head. These are the only alternatives at this stage that I believe the Taoiseach and his Government need to understand. The Government has moved on the matter of a ban on evictions. The Taoiseach said it will bring it forward with all due haste. We are anxious to assist the Government in doing this. I suggest we get this work done this week. Let us get this done this week. The Government should publish the legislation, work constructively with the Opposition and let us get this done this week, because families are desperate and terrified at the prospect of losing their rented home as we speak and meet here. We have a duty to protect those families. Let us, therefore, do this as a collective effort. Will the Taoiseach agree that we should get this work done this week? Let us do this week and have no more delays.No, we would not."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-10-05	---	1	Speaking on radio last Sunday, the Taoiseach gave an assurance that nobody would be disconnected from electricity supply this winter. He said:In an energy crisis of this kind we cannot have disconnections. We are very clear about that.This is very welcome news, as people are now under severe pressure. The energy credits announced in the budget are already being gobbled up. From this week, Electric Ireland customers face a price hike of 38% for electricity, while Bord Gáis customers have been hit with a massive increase of 45% and other energy companies will also hike their prices this month. The Government's refusal to cap electricity bills at pre-crisis levels has left people wide open to further hikes. In reality, and despite the Taoiseach's assurance at the weekend, households struggling to pay their bills remain in danger of disconnection. This is a very real and present fear. We know that 712 households were disconnected in the first half of this year and that was before the impact of the huge increases in bills this winter.Workers and families need more than words. They need a real plan from the Government that gives them the certainty that they will not be disconnected. The Government’s intention is to introduce a ban on disconnections for all customers from 1 December until the end of February. That it not good enough. It leaves people waiting far too long for protection and the time span is too short. We are now starting the run-up to Christmas, which is a most expensive time of the year. People are coming under huge financial strain today and are struggling to pay their bills today. The Government must start the ban on disconnections now. It should kick in immediately and should run until at least the end of March.The Taoiseach also said that the Government would protect pay-as-you-go meter users from disconnection. However, other than directing people to their local social welfare office, he does not have a plan to back up that commitment, or does he? Once a person’s €10 arrears allowance runs out, pay-as-you-go meters gets disconnected. Many households on prepaid meters are already rationing their electricity for fear of being cut off and that is a horrible situation for any family. Ní cheart go mbeadh aon teaghlach ag tabhairt aghaidh ar dícheangal fuinnimh an geimhreadh seo. Caithfidh an Rialtas cosc ar dícheangail a thabhairt isteach anois go dtí deireadh mí an Mhárta agus caithfidh an Rialtas plean a chur i bhfeidhm a chosnóidh custaiméirí ó a bheith dícheangailte.The Taoiseach needs to back up his promise that nobody will be disconnected with real action. Will the Government start the ban on disconnections for all customers now and extend it until the end of March? Will it take measures to ensure that pay-as-you-go electricity customers will not be disconnected this winter? Can the Taoiseach outline how this will work and, most important, how quickly it might be implemented?These times are very reminiscent of a decade ago when the troika was in town and people used to ration everything, including food. I remember families having cornflake days; that was dinner for them. I am hearing from families that they are rationing their electricity. The reality for many, and fear for many more, is that they will be left in a position whereby they have to take a decision to turn on a light or put breakfast in front of their children.The Taoiseach gave a commitment at the weekend that disconnections would not happen. I want him to set out in detail what that means for pay-as-you-go meter users. Some 200,000 households across the State have such meters. The Taoiseach has made a commitment. When will it kick in? How will it work? I put it to the Taoiseach that the ban on disconnections needs to start now and run until the end of March. Rather than rehashing all of the global factors, could the Taoiseach kindly answer my questions and reassure families who are afraid and struggling?Things are clearly not normal.Do not call me dishonest. Answer the question and do your job.Answer the question.Make a commitment. You are an absolute disgrace. Insulting me is not an answer.You consistently do it. You come in here and insult me and call me untruthful, and you do not answer your questions. Do your job.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-10-05	---	2	"I want to return to the issue of potential energy disconnections this winter. I will put the question that I put to the Taoiseach earlier and I would appreciate a straight answer to the question. Will he move to ensure the ban on disconnection starts now and runs to the end of March? I seek a ""Yes"" or ""No"" answer. Will he ensure those on pay-as-you-go meters are not open to disconnection? Will he give a cast-iron guarantee that will not happen? How will he achieve that?The Government has not done anything.The Taoiseach has still not answered the question."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-10-04	---	1	I ask the Taoiseach to scrap the Government's concrete block levy. The proposal is flawed and will make the housing crisis even worse. The Taoiseach says the levy is to ensure that industry contributes to redress schemes for defective blocks and pyrite. However, the reality is that this is not a levy on the industry at all. The Government's scheme is really a levy on those desperately seeking to buy or build a home, because companies will simply factor it in. They will pass on the increase to customers and it will inevitably push up prices that, as the Taoiseach is aware, have already soared beyond their Celtic tiger peak. The Society of Chartered Surveyors Ireland has warned that the levy could increase the price of a home by an eye-watering €4,000. Incredibly, it will also force homeowners with defective blocks in Mayo, Donegal, Clare and Limerick to pay even more to fix their homes, which is crazy.We are in the middle of an unprecedented housing disaster. For so many, affordability is a pipe dream and now the Government's levy will hit ordinary people in the pocket while they struggle with sky-high housing costs. Taoiseach, imagine for a moment that you were a member of the generation locked out of home ownership - dealing with extortionate rent so you cannot save for a deposit, with a historic lack of supply pushing up house prices and with the financial muscle of cuckoo funds sending those prices skyrocketing further - and then you hear that the Government, which should be working to get house prices down, is going to introduce a measure that will add thousands of euro to the price of a home. Imagine that. Taoiseach, imagine you were a first-time buyer who, after scrimping and scraping for years, was finally able to afford a home and then the Government comes along with this levy to make it harder again, or that you were one of those living in a house with defective blocks which is crumbling all around you while you have been crying out for a credible and fair remediation scheme, or that you were one of those who bought an apartment, duplex or other home riddled with Celtic tiger era fire safety defects and you have been left with no scheme at all. Could the Government honestly look any of those people in the eye and tell them that the levy is about them? It is a levy that puts the burden and pain on ordinary home buyers instead of where it belongs - on the banks, the profits of big developers and those responsible for defects. Ardóidh tobhach an Rialtais ar bhloic choincréite praghsanna tithe. Cuirfear ar aghaidh chuig gnáthcheannaitheoirí tí é. Ba cheart é a scriosadh agus tobhach atá dírithe ar na bainc, na forbróirí móra agus iad siúd atá freagrach as na bloic lochtacha a chur ina áit.Sinn Féin has tabled a motion before the Dáil tonight to correct this mess. I ask all Deputies to support it but it really should not have to go to a vote.I ask the Taoiseach to do the right thing. It is very clear from the reaction on the Government benches that there is a realisation that this levy, as constructed, is not the way forward. I ask the Government to scrap the concrete block levy now and replace it with a measure that will put the burden on those responsible for defects and not on the shoulders of those struggling to buy or to build a home.With pleasure, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle. I welcome our visitors from Ballyhaunis Community School.Fáilte isteach gach duine.The Taoiseach would be more than , some being more equal than others and none more unequally treated than that generation I have described to him who are locked out of home ownership, and well he knows it. Yes, industry has to pay. By the way, all of those on the benches opposite are responsible for the light-touch regulation or the no regulation at all that gave rise to this nightmare, so that is where culpability for that lies. Of course, the Taoiseach has to ensure that industry and those responsible, including the banks, pay - that is for sure. Never mind Deputy Eoin Ó Broin, who the Taoiseach has a minor fixation with, if I might say. It is the Society of Chartered Surveyors Ireland, not Deputy Eoin Ó Broin. It is the chartered surveyors and they are telling the Taoiseach that his initiative will inflate the cost by €4,000. I am asking him not to do that. That is it. Do not do that. Do not move forward with that levy. It is a simple as that.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-09-28	---	1	"Sinn Féin has consistently and repeatedly called on Government to tackle the extortionate rents that are crippling workers, families and students. We told the Government the way to do this is by cutting rents through a refundable tax credit equivalent to one month's rent and, crucially, by banning rent increases for three years. We were very clear. Both measures must go together in order to give hard-pressed renters the relief they so desperately need. The tax credit for one month's rent would put a meaningful amount of money back in renters' pockets and a ban would provide renters with the certainty that they will not be hammered by further rent hikes. To work, the two measures must go hand in hand. On countless occasions, I have asked the Taoiseach directly to introduce these measures with urgency Every time, his answer has been ""No"". Make no mistake: the Government's refusal to act caused already unaffordable rents to spiral further out of control.After leaving renters high and dry for years, yesterday the Government showed up with a €500 annual tax credit. That is it. The Government completely ignored the other part of the solution, namely, a ban on rent increases. A €500 tax credit is better than nothing. I have no doubt that those tenants who can avail of it will take what they can get as they struggle to pay their rent. Let us be very clear, however. This will not make a dent for people paying average rents of more than €2,000 per month, or €24,000 a year, in Dublin or those paying nearly €1,500 a month, or €18,000 per annum, across the State. Crucially, the tax credit is non-refundable meaning that those without a taxable income are left out. Who are they? The Government has left out students and low-income workers. Incredibly, it has done all of this without introducing a ban on rent increases. As a result, renters have no certainty and no real protection. In the absence of a ban on rent increases, the €500 credit will be wiped out by further hikes. This is true even in rent pressure zones. There is a real risk that without a ban on rent increases, the tax credit will in fact fuel a further rent hike. That is what the Taoiseach said when I raised this matter with him in April. He said there was no guarantee that a credit would result in a reduction in rents. He said it would be inflationary. He said it would add to rent prices. What has changed? The truth is that despite the Government's posturing, it has left the door wide open for more rent hikes, more exploitation and more hardship.Ní théann beart cíosa an Taoisigh fada go leor. Theip air an chinnteacht atá ag teastáil ag tionóntaí a thabhairt trí chosc a chur ar ardú cíosa. Ní dhéanfaidh a chreidmheas €500 aon rud mar beidh sé caite ar thuilleadh méaduithe. The Taoiseach has messed this up. The renters of Ireland deserve much better than this half-baked measure. I want him to correct it. My question is very simple. Will the Government give renters a real break by putting a month's rent back into their pockets through a refundable tax credit? Will it give renters the certainty and protection they deserve and need by banning rent increases for three years?The Government's record in office is that a housing crisis has morphed into a housing disaster.As a matter of fact, and for the record, since the Government took office, annual rents have increased by €3,600 in Dublin and €2,800 across the State. That is the Government's record. The facts speak for themselves.I am raising the issue of renters, specifically those who rent, those who are under pressure and those who were looking for the relief that we have been seeking for years, with the Taoiseach as he spreads the largesse. I have put this case to the Taoiseach for years. The Government showed up yesterday with something that is inadequate and flawed, and I want the Taoiseach to correct it. There are three design errors. First, €500 is not enough - not when people are facing the type of rents they are paying. Second, the tax credit is not refundable. This means that means students and low-income workers are excluded. They do not get even the €500. Third, and crucially----------for this to work, and for renters to have relief, there must be a ban on rent increases for three years.I invite the Taoiseach to correct the error in the proposals made yesterday.We are very real.The Taoiseach did not answer the questions."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-09-20	---	1	"Gabhaim buíochas leis an gCeann Comhairle. Workers across the country will be deeply alarmed and angered by the Government's latest plan for the State pension. Let us call this what it is: a Trojan horse designed by Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael to move the pension age to 70 by stealth. The cat is out of the bag. The Government wants people to work until the age of 70. I suppose this will not come as a surprise to anybody because, after all, these are the parties that were hell-bent on raising the pension age to 67 and then to 68 until the weight of enormous public pressure made them climb down. However, instead of doing the right thing and bringing forward a progressive and fair policy, the Government is now presenting a ploy to force people into working until they are 70 years old with the promise of then having a decent standard of living. ""Retire at 70 for an extra €60 in ... pension"" is how one newspaper summarised it. This, however, is a scam. The pension deferral the Government is proposing means, in reality, that thousands of euro in pension payments will be taken from workers, payments they would now have as of right. We must be clear on this point.It is not only those approaching pension age who are angered by this plan, but also young workers looking on now and wondering if they will ever get the chance to retire at all. Workers should have the right to retire at 65 with their pension, if that is what they want to do. The Government's proposal completely ignores the everyday reality of those who do hard physical jobs that take a toll on the body. Many of these workers started working at the age of 16 or 17, and some did so at a younger age. I am talking about factory workers, carers, retail workers, those on their feet all day in the service industries, nurses and many, many more. Hundreds and thousands of workers will be left out in the cold under this plan. They are not incapacitated and do not need an invalidity payment; they simply do not have anything left in the tank to keep working beyond the age of 65. They have put in their shift, they have done their bit and they are exhausted. Their right to retire at the age of 65 on a fair pension is not only a matter of public policy, but also a matter of principle and basic decency. One is either for it or against it. Clearly, the Taoiseach's Government is not only against it, but it will move heaven and earth to ensure it does not happen.Sinn Féin is for the right to retire at 65 with a decent pension. This is what we would deliver in government. By the way, if we were delivering the budget next week, we would back up this commitment with an increase in the State pension of €15. Tá plean ag an Taoiseach chun aois an phinsin a bhogadh go dtí 70 bliain d'aois. Tá daoine ag iarraidh go mbeadh an ceart acu éirí as ag 65 le pinsean réasúnta tar éis dóibh a bheith ag obair go crua ar feadh a saoil ar fad. It is the duty of any Government worthy of the name to provide a State pension that allows pensioners to live a good and secure life. People looking on today will be very worried. I have a straight question for the Taoiseach and I would like a straight answer. Why is his Government so dead against the right to retire with a decent pension at the age of 65?All of the anxiety that has been caused on this issue has been caused by the Taoiseach and people of his ilk who had plans, bear in mind, to ratchet the pension age up to 67, 68 and beyond. The Taoiseach cited all sorts of reasons and rationale for doing that. Our position has been and remains consistent that the appropriate and fair age to be given the choice to retire with one's pension is the age of 65.What today's proposal sets out is a system of deferral, an enticement the Taoiseach might say, for people to work on until they are 70. I regard that as a move of coercion, not to incentivise but by stealth to----------ratchet the pension age up to 70, and that is simply wrong. I am not one bit ageist. For sure, there are those who will wish to work beyond the age of 65 and they must be facilitated in that. More power to them.However, we live in the real world, gentlemen and ladies, and we live in a world where people who have worked from a young age in very physical jobs simply are not able and do not wish to work beyond 65.Let me repeat my question to the Taoiseach and he might answer without evasion or insult towards me. Why is he so against the simple premise of a retirement age of 65 by choice and why is the Government's proposal today----------not simply to set that out?Then the Taoiseach should address-----He has not.We in Sinn Féin introduced legislation on that years ago.Okay. The Taoiseach does not want to answer. He will not stand over his own proposal. Fine.And an enhanced pension at 70.Yes. I have described it accurately."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-09-14	---	1	I thank the Ceann Comhairle for that unparalleled vote of confidence; I am very touched.Go raibh maith agat. I first acknowledge the presence of the British ambassador to Ireland. Cuirim fáilte roimhe. I extend again our profound sympathies on the loss of Queen Elizabeth II for the British people, in particular for Irish unionists for whom she has been a very significant figure of great affinity and affection. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a h-anam dílis.As the Taoiseach knows, workers and families are being hammered by unprecedented surges in energy bills. Households have been hit by more than 50 price hikes since the beginning of last year with more to come. To underscore the seriousness of the situation, a Government memo seen by the media last week states that 1 million households could face annual energy bills of €6,000 if prices keep rising at the current rate. This prediction will have sent a shiver down the spines of people who are already struggling to light and heat their homes.We now head into the winter. We have darker days and longer nights, and households’ use of energy will increase significantly at a time when prices are through the roof, which will only add to the unbearable pressure people are under. The hard truth is that many households will go under trying to pay these extortionate bills unless the Government makes the right intervention.There has been much kite-flying from the Government, mainly centred around further energy credits. While energy credits are well and good, they do not provide certainty. They do not protect people from the continuous barrage of hikes. In fact, when the Government introduced its initial energy credit, it was too slow. It was wiped out by further price hikes before it even landed into people’s accounts. Therefore, this is clearly a flawed approach. Households need a Government response that matches the scale of the crisis. I believe the Government must take action to cut electricity prices to pre-crisis levels and apply a cap to freeze them at that level until the end of February of next year. The benefit of this measure is twofold. First, it ensures that electricity bills are more affordable, and, additionally and crucially, it provides households with the certainty they need at these difficult times. It provides certainty that their electricity bills will be brought down, that the relief provided will not be swallowed up by future price hikes and that they can get through the winter months. Cutting electricity bills and freezing them at pre-crisis levels will deliver that assurance. It simply makes sense and yet speaking on radio yesterday, the Taoiseach ruled this out. His colleague, the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, echoed this, suggesting that things should simply be worked out at an EU Level. I know that people have heard that line before. They have heard that line used as an alibi for the slow response of the Government to this crisis that left households struggling for months.Tá sé in am billí leictreachais a ghearradh agus caidhp a chur ar bhillí chun iad a choinneáil ag an méid a bhí siad roimh an ngéarchéim. Thabharfadh sé sin faoiseamh agus cinnteacht do theaghlaigh atá ag streachailt agus thabharfadh sé cosaint dóibh ó arduithe breise sna míonna amach romhainn.It is all about choices. In the budget, the Government must choose to cut electricity bills and to cap them at pre-crisis levels. It is the right thing to do.It is the only measure that can provide some level of certainty for households. It would prevent future price hikes and ease the burden on hard-pressed workers and families. By cutting and then capping electricity bills, the Government could choose to protect households. I am asking and urging the Government to make that choice.Not for the first time but once again, the Taoiseach is totally and utterly wrong in his response here. Our proposal is about helping families. It is about providing certainty so they can get through what will be very difficult winter months. Our proposals are time limited. Interventions at European level are, of course, necessary and welcome, but they should not be used again as an excuse for the Government to delay and dither and sit on its hands. In fact, our proposal would work in tandem with the proposed EU measures. Our proposals are similar to price certainty measures that have been introduced elsewhere, for example, in France and Romania. Other emergency measures, as the Taoiseach knows, have been introduced in Spain, Portugal and Italy.The only blank cheque in question here is the one the Taoiseach is asking families to give to energy companies. His failure to act in the way I have described will allow prices to continue to rise. One thing is absolutely certain: families cannot cope with that and they are depending on the Taoiseach to act definitively. I will ask the Taoiseach again to move to cut electricity bills back to pre-crisis levels and to cap them at that level for the winter months until the end of February. That is what is required here.So may the Taoiseach.Winter is not-----I asked the Taoiseach about energy. He will not give people certainty.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-07-13	---	1	Last year, the parents of 18 babies born at Cork University Maternity Hospital were informed that their children's organs were sent to Belgium for incineration, without their knowledge or consent. This happened on two occasions between March and April 2020. The bereaved parents had believed that the organs of their babies, who had been subject to autopsy, would be cremated or buried in a sensitive and dignified manner and that they would be contacted before this happened. As we now know, none of that happened. These revelations were met with understandable public outrage and we can only ever imagine the extreme hurt and distress that these families have experienced.A review of practices at Cork University Maternity Hospital was commenced at that time and a HSE internal audit to establish the organ-retention and disposal practices at public hospitals across the board. That audit, according to media reports, reveals that the inappropriate disposal of organs was still in use at that time, at University Hospital Limerick and our Lady of Lourdes Hospital in Drogheda. Incredibly, the same month that the review got under way into the scandal at Cork University Maternity Hospital, the organs of two babies born in University Hospital Limerick were sent for incineration, again to Belgium.The investigation has also uncovered that multiple public hospitals across the State have retained organs from children for more than the one year specified by HSE policy. This happened in hospitals in Dublin, Tullamore, Limerick, Waterford and Port Laoise. At Crumlin children's hospital, the organs of one child were kept, it seems, for more than 20 years. The breaches of care and dignity with regard to the treatment of organs are widespread and these revelations have emerged when the families affected by the initial scandal at Cork University Maternity Hospital are still waiting for answers.These parents have been told on four separate occasions that there will be a delay in giving them the report of the review team despite the fact that the review is complete. These are parents who lost their babies in tragic circumstances and had to endure the heartache of hearing that their child's organs were disposed of, alongside medical waste. Ms Katie Quilligan is one of those. Her son, James, was one of the 18 babies and she says:we are still waiting for answers... I don’t think I’ll be able to fully accept or process what happened until we get those answers. Waiting is like going through the grieving process all over again ... the HSE is letting us down.I am sure that the Taoiseach agrees that all of this is unacceptable. It is unacceptable that these parents are still kept in the dark. They were also promised the speedy delivery of legislation to protect the legal guidelines around the retention and disposal of human organs and tissue. The human tissue Bill was due to be published by the end of last year, but this too has been delayed and has caused stress and frustration. Tá teaghlaigh ag streachailt agus tá an Stát ag teip go dona orthu. Tá freagraí ag teastáil ó na teaghlaigh seo agus caithfidh an Rialtas reachtaíocht a chur i bhfeidhm atá ag teastáil chun a chinntiú nach féidir lena leithéid tarlú arís.I am certain that everyone in this Dáil wants to make this right. I am certain that we need absolute assurances that these practices have ceased and that this is not currently happening in our hospitals. When will the parents affected by the scandal at Cork University Maternity Hospital be given the review report, which is now complete? When will that wider audit of hospitals beyond Cork be published?I very much welcome that. I think we are of one mind across the Dáil that all this is completely unacceptable. As the Taoiseach has described, the families have been through losing a precious child, a loved one, and then experienced the horror of discovering that their organs were disposed of in this manner, alongside, as I said, medical waste. This can never, ever happen again. We need to have an assurance here in the Oireachtas, and in turn to reassure the public, that this is not current practice in any hospital in the State. People deserve that reassurance.For the purposes of clarity, the Taoiseach is calling for the report of the review to be shared with the families without further delay, for the publication of the audit by the HSE without delay and for the publication of the legislation by September. All of that is very welcome. By the way, we are aware of the complexities around transplantation and the absolute necessity of getting the law right. The Taoiseach will, I am sure, have the full co-operation of the entire House but we need speed now. We need to sort this out for those families.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-07-12	---	1	Last month, President Michael D. Higgins described the housing crisis as a disaster. I believe that he gave voice to the hard realities faced by those desperately struggling to put an affordable roof over their heads because when people cannot afford a home, it does not just stop there; it has wide-reaching and deep consequences for our society.Today we read that schools in Dublin report that teachers are leaving and seeking employment in other parts of the country due to extortionate rents and soaring house prices. Schools are finding it very difficult to recruit replacements. One school in Stillorgan, it is reported, recently wrote to parents advising them that six of its teachers were relocating outside Dublin. The teachers' unions are alarmed. They say that difficulties with teacher supply are made worse by the fact that teachers cannot set up home in this city. They say that teachers who commute to Dublin are now considering working elsewhere because of the soaring cost of fuel. The teachers' unions are worried because schools are struggling to get teachers in important subjects like maths and science. Many schools are forced to consider asking teachers who have Gaeilge but who do not have a degree in Irish to teach the subject. The situation has become so bad that some schools may have to consider dropping optional subjects. We now face, therefore, the prospect of another serious problem rooted in the housing crisis. If left unchecked, it will have major knock-on effects. Being unable to afford a home impacts the quality of life of teachers, which then affects the ability of schools to deliver and, in turn, impacts the education of our children. It ripples through everything.We should not be surprised that this problem is emerging. The average rent in Dublin is now more than €2,000. Average house prices range up to €600,000, which is truly off the wall. How could anyone build a life when facing those costs? By the time a teacher pays the rent or the mortgage repayment, a huge chunk of his or her wage is gone. Add in the spiralling cost of living, the relentless hikes in electricity and gas prices, childcare fees and the sharp increases in the price of food and life in the city has become literally unaffordable. We can see that teachers are left in an impossible situation, and why they are now voting with their feet. Tá múinteoirí ag fágáil Bhaile Átha Cliath mar gheall ar phraghsanna tithe atá ag ardú as cuimse agus ar chíosanna ríchostasacha. Tá scoileanna ag streachailt le múinteoirí eile a fháil. Ní mór don Rialtas gníomhú anois chun deireadh a chur leis an ngéarchéim atá mar thubaiste anois. Those caught up in the housing crisis, including teachers, are crying out for change. The Government cannot allow this problem to escalate and to become, in itself, another crisis.What is the Government's assessment of this situation?Does the Taoiseach share the teacher unions' alarm over the situation? What does his Government propose to do by way of response? Does he plan to meet the teachers' unions on this matter?I set out for the Taoiseach a story that I think is very worrying. The teachers' unions are expressing alarm over the fact that teachers are relocating from Dublin because they cannot afford to live here.They cannot afford the rents. They cannot afford to get a mortgage. These are the facts on the ground. I asked the Taoiseach whether he shared concerns about this. I asked him what is the Government's assessment of this phenomenon. I asked furthermore whether he will meet the teaching unions on this matter. I asked him what he proposes to do to avert what could become a very difficult situation, particularly in Dublin, if teachers cannot afford to live here and if they are under pressure even in terms of the cost of the commute. The Taoiseach did not answer the questions. I ask him respectfully that when he takes to his feet he answers these questions. What is the Government's assessment of this? What will the Taoiseach do about it? Will the Taoiseach meet the teaching unions on this matter?Yes but I asked the Taoiseach about teachers.I am well aware of that.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-07-06	---	1	I extend a very warm welcome to all the groups in the Public Gallery referred to by Deputy Cairns. Tá fáilte rompu go léir.Parents across Ireland are under enormous pressure to meet extortionate back to school costs. It is a big source of stress for families every summer but this year is exceptional, given the ever worsening cost-of-living crisis. For weeks, we have been telling the Government that parents face huge back to school costs now and that an autumn budget would be far too late for families. Time and again, Ministers lined up to parrot the Government mantra that budget 2023, which is almost three months away, was the only way for the Government to help. Then, at dinner time yesterday, after weeks of stubbornness and just two hours before a Sinn Féin motion calling on the Government to act, its position changed. Suddenly, it was possible for the Government to step in with an increase in the rate of the back to school allowance for those already in receipt of that payment. The Minister could have saved all those families weeks of worry by making this announcement and taking this decision sooner. However, I welcome the Government's U-turn. I am glad it has finally listened to the Opposition, at least in part. Any extra financial support for families on fixed and low incomes struggling to make it to the end of the week is a very good thing.There is problem, however. The Government has left behind middle-income families, who are in dire straits. Any family with a household income of €621 a week will not get a red cent of back to school allowance. A household income of €621 a week is modest. These are families who receive very little support from the State but are now fighting to stay afloat. The Government has left behind these families, who struggle to pay the mortgage or rent and who cannot afford to put fuel in the car to get to work or pay extortionate energy bills. These families' grocery bills are through the roof to such an extent that many have started to cut back on basics. Many of these families have used their savings or maxed out their credit cards trying to keep up, and now they have nowhere left to turn. When the Government had an opportunity to make a big difference, it settled instead for half measures. Middle-income parents went out to work this morning feeling let down again. Many of them have no idea where they will get hundreds of euro to send their children back to school in September. When they ask why they have been left out, what will the Minister's answer be?Ní mór an liúntas éadaí agus coisbhirt don scoilbhliain nua a mhéadú chuig teaghlaigh atá ar mheánioncaim, atá fágtha ina dhiaidh ag an Rialtas. Ní féidir leo na costais ollmhóra a bhaineann lena bpáistí a thabhairt ar ais chuig an seomra ranga i mí Mheán Fómhair a íoc.I am always amazed at the ability of this Government to refuse to do those things that patently need to be done and to do them correctly and fully. The Dáil will rise for the summer next week so time is running out for us. I am asking the Minister at this juncture to listen to the Opposition again and do the right thing. I am asking him to expand the back to school payment to cover an additional 500,000 children, whose middle-income parents are in desperate need of support. The Minister holds the purse strings. He can make this happen. This is an existing scheme. We want the Government to expand it. We are appealing to the Government not to pack up for the summer having left these families behind.The Government took its time listening to what is just plain common sense by making a move on these matters now in July and putting money in families' pockets when they need it and when it will count.I ask the Minister to take the next step. He is surely not saying to families who have €621 a week that they are home and hosed, and that it is plain sailing for them. We describe these families as middle-income families. It is not; it is a very modest income. As the Minister knows, these families cannot qualify for many of the State supports that others on lower incomes can qualify for. Is the Minister saying to these families that they are on their own? He cannot do that. I appreciate the need for targeted measures. The Minister has borrowed from our proposals and I want him to complete the journey. We proposed a targeted approach. We are with him on that. He has to address the fact that he has left substantial numbers of families and children struggling. I want him to extend this scheme to capture those 500,000 children, who need this. Regardless of the Minister not going far enough in the political discourse, this is about families, and I ask him to simply follow the logic of his own argument and do the right thing.The Government has left those families behind. It is disgraceful.We are perfectly happy.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-07-06	---	2	Everyday, people are asking themselves after a decade of Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael botched policy that favoured private developers and landlords, how is it that in the face of a crisis like no other in housing we are subjected to the same banal rhetoric we have had to listen to for the last ten or 15 minutes. The Minister should ask himself how we have record house prices, record rent levels and record homelessness for families, single people and children. Despite his assertion to the contrary, he should ask himself how we find ourselves almost in quicksand. The Government is making beggars of people, of our young, of our families, of our older people----------for the honour and glory----------of a roof over their heads. Yet, we come in here----------week in and week out and listen to this rubbish from a Government that is failing. I ask the Minister the direct question.In the face of the ESRI report, which is just the latest evidence of this catastrophe, does the Government still contend that it is getting it right because it very clearly is not?Big bucks for developers.The Government has failed.The Government has failed.Like Croí Cónaithe and €140,000 for developers.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-07-05	---	1	We have just two weeks left in this Dáil term, which is two weeks for the Government to intervene with measures to alleviate the enormous pressure the cost-of-living crisis is placing on households. Yesterday, the Ministers for Finance and Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputies Donohoe, and Michael McGrath, respectively, announced to great fanfare that budget 2023 will be brought forward to 27 September. This does not mean very much to workers and families who are at breaking point today, 5 July. A week is a long time for households when every euro counts. It is a very long time when one cannot afford to pay extortionate energy bills or put fuel in the car or food on the table. It beggars belief that people who will struggle to make it to the end of this week are being asked to wait another 13 weeks for help from the Government.This lack of urgency is especially stressful for parents who face the most expensive back-to-school period for a generation. As the Tánaiste knows, children go back to school in late August, not at the end of September. Schoolbook lists have already arrived, Bus Éireann has sent out the reminder emails for the fees for school transport, the letters requesting voluntary contributions are on their way and school uniforms, sport and PE gear will have to be bought in the next few weeks. Parents will fork out a small fortune. Many will be forced into debt simply to get their children back to school. These are the households pressed to the brink. My office is inundated with calls from families that are at breaking point. I am sure the Tánaiste has received similar calls. These are calls from families who never thought that they would need support from the State or from charities, much less from food banks, in order to make it to the end of the week. They have no idea where they will find the money to get their children back to school in September. The budget on 27 September will be far too late for these families. They do not have the luxury of waiting another 13 weeks for the Government to show up. They need action now.Tá teaghlaigh i ndeireadh na feide le costais scoile ag ardú as cuimse. Caithfidh an Rialtas dul i ngleic leis seo láithreach. Tá mé ag iarraidh ar an Rialtas síneadh ama a thabhairt maidir leis an liúntas éadaí agus coisbhirt don scoilbhliain nua, agus an liúntas sin a ardú, chun sos a thabhairt do thuismitheoirí atá faoi bhrú millteanach.Sinn Féin will bring a motion before the Dáil tonight. The motion includes proposals that would ease the financial burden of back-to-school costs and give families a real break in the here and now. As part of these measures, we are asking the Government to act immediately to improve the back-to-school allowance in two ways. First, we are asking it to extend the allowance to middle-income households. These are the households that currently receive no State support but who are at the pin of their collar trying to make ends meet. Middle-income households must get the back-to-school allowance and the help it offers.Second, for low-income families and for those on fixed incomes, we want the Government to increase the back-to-school allowance by 50% to help meet the soaring costs of getting children back to school.These are very reasonable, sensible and necessary asks. There is an urgency now in all of this. If action is take in respect of these matters, it make a massive difference at what is a very tough time for so many families.I thank the Tánaiste for his reply. Those high structural costs, as he knows, long predate this particular cost-of-living crunch, which I am sure he would acknowledge.The Government's response to these matters has been slow. It has lacked urgency but we can agree to disagree on that. What I would like us to agree on is that families preparing to get children back to school in late August need help and assistance now. I put it to the Tánaiste again that it is crucial that middle-income families have access to a back-to-school payment.The Tánaiste pointed out that there was some improvement in the budget. That is now grossly insufficient.We calculate that as many as 500,000 households need to be given this payment in middle-income brackets. Furthermore, those on lower incomes and fixed incomes need a substantial hike in the level of the payment made to them. Will the Government move on this urgent matter now? The children will go back to school in August and as I described, the bills and the pressure for payment is happening now and we need action now on these precise measures.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-06-29	---	1	Last night Sinn Féin brought forward a motion calling on the Government to introduce an emergency budget to ease the enormous pressure on struggling households. I impressed upon the Taoiseach yesterday - at least, I tried - how this crisis is worsening for so many. Last night, however, even though families throughout the country are at breaking point, Ministers stood up one after the other in this Chamber and opposed an emergency budget. I listened to the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform's partner and political twin, the Minister, Deputy Donohoe, on the radio this morning.He says that he appreciates the challenge that households are facing. In the next breath he says that he is not going to do anything about it. Tonight, it seems, Ministers and Members of the Government benches will line up and vote against the introduction of measures to help families and workers. The message from Government to households on the brink is to strap yourselves in because you are on your own.We have only three weeks left in the Dáil term and Government will then clock off for the summer. Its Members will then walk away telling people to wait for budget 2023. Why? Because it does not have a plan in the here and now.Minister, October is too late for so many families. There are people watching in today who are literally only one bill and rent payment away from going over the edge and going under. These are people who work very long hours and cannot afford the basics. This is the hard reality of people’s lives. Despite everything that the Minister might say, clearly his Government does not get it. In fact, it is incredible to hear the Government congratulate itself over and over for having done so much when, clearly, so much more needs to be done.Children, as the Minister knows, head back to school in late August and early September, not October. Those families face astronomical costs now. Energy companies are not going to give customers a break between now and October. Rip-off electricity bills will keep coming through the summer months. People go to fill their cars every week between now and October and, by the way, they are paying more than €2 a litre today. This is all happening now.Asking people to wait until October for help is asking them to wait for disaster. An emergency budget is a sensible and necessary response at this time. Action to cut rents, emergency cash payments for low and middle income earners and increases in social welfare rates to protect the most vulnerable are reasonable and necessary measures and yet the Taoiseach and the Minister, Deputy Donohoe, tell us that they are not for turning. This demonstrates very dramatically the priorities of this Government as I suspect, as many others do, that if it was those at the top who needed a bailout, Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael would be in like a flash.In fact, the Government has demonstrated before that when it is those at the top, the Government is in like a flash but when it is ordinary people who need a bailout package, its message is tough luck. Tá sé doghlactha go vótálfaidh an Rialtas in aghaidh buiséad éigeandála anocht. A Aire, teastaíonn cúnamh ó dhaoine anois. Beidh sé tubaisteach dóibh iarraidh orthu fanacht ceithre mhí.Tonight’s vote then is a test for every Deputy in this House who sees their constituents suffering. One can either vote for them or vote against them; it is actually as plain and simple as that. This is a state of emergency for households. They need an emergency budget now.The good news is even better than the Minister alludes to because not alone are we in a relatively strong position as an economy, as he brags, but in fact it is projected that the Government will take in €5.6 billion more in tax revenues than projected on budget day. The Minister talked about clarity but I ask him to allow me to give him clarity as he brags about the economic position and how well he has managed the public finances. As we meet today, in households across this country, getting a child back to school in September is now a household crisis. How is that Minister? These are the facts on the ground. School books lists started to arrive today in many households. The outlook for those families who work very hard is not relatively positive. In fact, for many of them, it is terrifying. I am asking the Minister, very simply, that in his position as a Minister of this Government how he will respond now, react now and support those families now and not in October. That is the net point.If I may say, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle, it is very galling to hear on the one hand the bragging of Government on the wonderful job it is doing, how wonderfully rosy the economic outlook is and, while families suffer, the Minister sits on his hands. Nero fiddles and Rome burns.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-06-29	---	2	"Last month I raised with the Minister the shocking increase in the rate of homelessness and he described the position as disappointing, regrettable and concerning. The words ""shocking"", ""shameful"" and ""unacceptable"" are more appropriate because the latest report on homelessness is a damning indictment of Government housing policy. More than 10,000 people are now homeless and for the first time, single person homelessness has hit 5,000. There are more than 3,000 children homeless and growing up in hotels and bed and breakfasts, robbed of a secure childhood. This is happening when there are nearly 170,000 vacant homes in the State.The Government should be scandalised by this crisis but it is clearly not. It is the same old story. The Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, has failed and is failing; his position is increasingly untenable. What emergency measures will the Government put in place to urgently address the homelessness crisis?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-06-28	---	1	We have three boxing champions in the Public Gallery whom I wish to welcome and acknowledge. Amy Broadhurst is the International Boxing Association, IBA, light welterweight champion of the world, Dearbhla Tinnelly is the youth light heavyweight European champion and Evelyn Igharo is the current Irish elite champion at 70 kg. They are joined by coach Jim O'Neill from the Clann Naofa boxing club in Muirhevnamore in Dundalk. These women are trailblazers. They were around the House. Members met them and we were all a bit star-struck. Well done and keep at it. I also see some of the Muslim Sisters of Éire here. They are also most welcome. I thank the Ceann Comhairle.There are just three weeks left in this Dáil term, three weeks for the Government to see sense and introduce an emergency budget to tackle the cost-of-living crisis. If the Government does not intervene now, many households will be pushed over the edge because they are on the brink today. They simply cannot wait for October for budget 2023. The crisis is getting worse, as the Taoiseach knows. Yesterday, the Central Bank of Ireland reported that one third of families are just making ends meet. This is up from one quarter of families in January. The supermarket analyst company, Kantar, has stated that the sharp increases could add €453 to the average annual grocery bill. Again, this is a jump of €100 on the company's estimate from last month.Workers and families, as the Taoiseach knows, are finding it increasingly difficult just to afford the basics and are struggling to put a roof over their heads, food on the table, fuel in the car and clothes on their kids' backs. Esther Pugh is the manager of the Barnardos centre in Loughlinstown. What she told the media yesterday encapsulates the situation. She said:... we would have children coming into the service wearing their pyjamas for day clothes, and specifically bought to be day clothes... The big worry is electricity running out - families don't have money to run their washing machine and tumble dryers.[...]I have worked in Barnardos for a long number of years and what I am seeing now is the kind of deprivation we would have seen back in the '80s. It is bad - there is no point saying otherwise.These are heartbreaking words, as I am sure the Taoiseach will agree, and they capture everyday life for so many families now. We are now at a point where having a full-time job is not a guaranteed protection against the sharp edge of this crisis. Some households with two incomes are really struggling, so what hope and what chance do those on low pay have? We know that international factors are at play. We accept that. We also know, however, that this cost-of-living crisis is a catastrophe for our society. I have been contacted by parents who are worried that they are raising their children now for emigration.I have been contacted by young people who do not want to leave but have their bags packed for Canada and Australia. They say they cannot afford a life at home. That is the terrible vista again of forced emigration looming for us.Tá teaghlaigh i ndeireadh na feide. Anocht, iarrfaidh rún Shinn Féin ar an Rialtas buiséad éigeandála a thabhairt isteach. Ní féidir le hoibrithe agus teaghlaigh fanacht ar bhuiséad 2023. Tá daoine ag streachailt. Teastaíonn tacaíocht uathu anois. Tonight, Sinn Féin will bring a motion to the Dáil that will call on the Government to introduce an emergency budget to deliver and extend cost-of-living supports for workers and families. We should not have to bring this motion but the Government has buried its head on what is a state of emergency for households. I call on every Deputy to support this motion. I want all of us to work together to ensure that people get the relief they need so badly and as a matter of urgency. The truth is the Government cannot clock off in three weeks' time and leave families fighting to stay afloat. That would be wholly wrong. We need an emergency budget and the workers and families of Ireland need it now.For all of what the Taoiseach has recited on his list, Esther Pugh of the Barnardos centre in Loughlinstown has told the story of what is happening on the ground and the real fear and the real stress and pressure that families are living with.Our motion, by the way, does not state that the Government did nothing; on the contrary, we recognise the international factors. Putin is despicable and his war is despicable, but the job of this House, of the Taoiseach's Government in particular, is to protect Irish families and Irish workers in the here and now. The Taoiseach says he is concerned and determined, but there is no urgency in the response. He says the Government cannot chase this matter month to month. I am not asking it to.I am asking it to recognise that families have to live and to exist day to day and week to week and that they are struggling badly. For the life of me I cannot understand why the Government resists what is so obviously needed. We need a comprehensive, targeted set of measures to give people support and breathing room in the here and now. The idea that they can wait until October as the Government decides on its package is simply not fair and not acceptable. I fear that the Taoiseach is being dismissive of the real-life experience I am setting out for him. I appeal to him again to do the right thing and to deliver this comprehensive package with urgency and with an emergency in mind. We need this emergency budget.Yes.Come on.No it is not.We cite the €5.6 billion more that the Government has in tax revenues.People are not struggling. Okay.It is a very difficult summer.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-06-21	---	1	"We have a full Visitors Gallery. I hope I am allowed a bit of local favouritism to say céad míle fáilte to the páistí from Gaelscoil Bharra. I am sure the Taoiseach will say hello to them also. They were asking me earlier who is my biggest rival and I said I would have to say Micheál Martin. They kind of cheered that on. Cuirim fáilte roimh na paistí agus roimh gach duine eile.I think it is best not said.It is Gaelscoil Bharra from Cabra.Yes, as in Fionnbarra. Iontach.Hang on. It is not a Cork school. The Taoiseach cannot go seizing our schools.It is important that the Taoiseach would hear the voices and experiences of people who are struggling to get by. For example, the woman who says: ""My husband is 70. He is still working. He can't stop at the moment because if he stops, we know it will be very difficult for us just to live."" Or the mother who says: ""I have started to cut back on my food shop. The price of everything has gone up. Everything. The kind of things that we cannot do without. Or another mother who says: ""I now go to a food bank. It is embarrassing, but if I don't go, we'll go hungry. I am there every Tuesday and every Thursday and it is packed to the rafters.""These are the words of thousands of people who took to the streets on Saturday afternoon because they are pushed now to the brink by an ever-worsening cost-of-living crisis. Despite the hardship that they face, they see a Government refusing to take action that will make a difference. Households are now caught in the eye of a perfect storm of soaring prices. They are ripped off by extortionate rents and mortgage repayments. They are ripped off by big energy bills. They are ripped off at the pumps for petrol and diesel. They are ripped off by sharp increases in the cost of groceries. People face unbearable pressure. They all said one thing, with one voice, on Saturday. They said they are at breaking point. They cannot wait until October for the budget and then wait again until January for measures or relief to kick in. People are suffering now. They are being pushed to the edge now and they need the Government to act now, today.An emergency budget is needed because people face a disaster as they struggle to afford the basics. There are mothers who cannot afford a new pair of shoes for their child, parents who are struggling to put breakfast on the table and elderly people who are choosing between heating and eating. The Taoiseach is asking these people who are in dire straits to wait. That is just not right.At Saturday's protest in Cork, Ms Catríona Twomey who runs Cork Penny Dinners - she is a great lady and the Taoiseach knows her well - said, ""...we fed over 500 people today ... I can get through everything else but when children are hungry and their parents are crying, [well] that gets [to] me."" That is the Ireland of 2022. How on earth can anyone in the Government look these families in the eye and tell them it has done enough? What these people live through daily tells us explicitly that enough has not been done. The response from the Government has been slow and has lacked urgency. We all know international factors are at play and we accept the Government cannot do everything but it can do more. Without emergency support, families will face a very difficult back-to-school period and a brutal winter as energy costs continue to rise. Tá an costas maireachtála imithe ó smacht. Tá teaghlaigh i mbaol faoi láthair. Caithfidh an Rialtas aghaidh a thabhairt ar scála na géarchéime seo. Teastaíonn cáinaisnéis uainn sa Dáil láithreach.The Cabinet met this morning. We were told the cost-of-living crisis was high on the agenda. I hope there was a realisation at that meeting that households cannot wait another six months and the Government cannot pack up for the summer and leave workers and families in the lurch. The Government must now respond with urgency and introduce an emergency budget.First things first. I am not asking the Taoiseach to chase inflation. I am asking him to recognise the reality that people are struggling now, in June, and that people will continue to struggle through the summer months, not to mention the winter ahead of them. The Taoiseach says that we need to protect our economy, and we do, but above all else we need to protect our people. Above all else we cannot take risks with our people, risks that have children hungry and parents crying. That is the reality. Unfortunately, the Taoiseach is asking people to wait.With all sincerity and not in a spirit of political rivalry, I appeal to the Taoiseach to change that position. Families are suffering now and they desperately need targeted and thoughtful measures to give them breathing space now. The Taoiseach stated that the Government was not asking families to wait. If he is insisting that the October budget will be the moment when relief is delivered, then he is asking people to wait. That is wrong. It is not real and is totally unfair. What measures will the Government introduce with all due haste now, not in October?Then protect our people and he will not win.Four months."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-06-21	---	2	"Austin Currie, through his long political career, was an influential Irish public figure. As a leading member of the early civil rights campaign, co-founder of the SDLP, Minister in the short-lived 1974 power-sharing Executive in the North and Fine Gael Minister of State, Austin had a long and distinguished record of public service.He first served in the old Stormont Parliament for East Tyrone from 1964 to 1972, representing first the Nationalist Party and later the SDLP. Austin was among a class of young nationalists in the North who had benefitted from educational reform after the Second World War and sought job equality not alone for themselves but for everybody. In 1964, when he was elected to the old Stormont, he was the youngest person ever to gain a seat in that institution. He was one of the organisers of the first civil rights march in August 1968, which followed the occupation of a house in Caledon, County Tyrone in protest at discrimination in local council housing allocations. Austin was in the Caledon house just hours before the police ousted him and others, such as Patsy Gildernew and Joe Campbell. The photograph of him there became a recurrent and iconic image in media coverage of the civil rights movement.He once eloquently described the effect of partition on the nationalist community in the North:Partition was used to try to cut us off from the rest of the Irish nation. Unionists did their best to stamp out our nationalism and, the educational system, to the extent it could...was oriented to Britain and we were not even allowed to use names such as Séamus or Seán. When my brothers' godparents went to register their birth, they were told no such names as Séamus or Seán existed in Northern Ireland and were asked for the English equivalent.Later in his career, Mr. Currie became a Fine Gael Deputy for Dublin West in 1989 and finished a creditable third in the 1990 presidential election. He was the first person to be elected to parliaments in Belfast and Dublin, and served as a Minister in both. He was the first ever Minister in an Irish Government with dedicated responsibility for children.Austin Currie long harboured doubts about the commitment of many politicians in the South to the plight of nationalists in the North, many of whom demonstrated absolute indifference. In his 2004 autobiography, , he wrote about his experience of running in that presidential election and the prejudice he faced as a northern nationalist from those within the political system here who harboured deeply partitionist attitudes. He wrote: ""What annoyed, indeed angered me most was the suggestion that because I came from the North, I was not a real Irishman.""Following the deaths of Seamus Mallon and John Hume in January and August 2020 respectively, Austin was the last surviving founder of the SDLP. Whether as a representative of the SDLP or Fine Gael, Austin was often a spirited and determined opponent of my party and we of his politics, but that is the nature of politics. Today as we reflect on his very considerable life and political career, we pay tribute to his service to his constituents and his country. On my behalf and that of Sinn Féin, I express our condolences to his wife Anita, his family, his children, his grandchildren, all his friends and to his political colleagues in the SDLP, Fine Gael and beyond. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-06-14	---	1	I warmly welcome our Ukrainian friends.Last night, the British Government published legislation that gives British Ministers power to override unilaterally parts of the Irish protocol. This move by the British Prime Minister, Mr. Boris Johnson, and his Government is disgraceful and utterly reckless. Mr Johnson's belligerent approach to Ireland is part of a cynical attempt to cling to power in Britain at any cost. It jeopardises so much achieved by so many over such a long period of time. It fundamentally undermines the Brexit protections for Ireland that were so hard won, and it risks serious economic and political damage.I share the view of the Minister, Deputy Coveney, that Ireland will not be the collateral damage for irresponsible Tory actions. Therefore, let us be clear. The British Government's plan to strip away the protocol is a plan intentionally to break international law. In a supreme act of bad faith, it intends to walk away from its legal obligations and agreements. It is worth remembering that not alone did the British Government sign-up the protocol but, in fact, it was central to designing its content and operation.The utter recklessness of this move is underscored by the fact the protocol is, in fact, working. It gives the North access to both the British market and the EU Single Market of more than 500 million people. The North's economy is outperforming the English economy, business is growing and new jobs are being created. Of course, cross-Border trade has increased significantly, and the all-island economy is thriving. The Tory Government now puts all of this at risk. We have heard voice after voice from the business community describe how this unilateral action threatens significant harm to businesses in Ireland and, indeed, in Britain. It endangers thousands of jobs and investment. The way to resolve implementation issues is to sit down and talk to the EU, but this is something the British have refused to do now for 123 days. Instead of engagement, Mr. Johnson opts for shameful political play-acting.Tory disdain for political stability in Ireland is now up in lights again. This latest move is part of a wider wrecking agenda that seeks to undermine the Good Friday Agreement and to rob our people of a better future. Mr. Johnson allows the DUP to block the formation of an Executive in Belfast. Mr. Johnson then uses this political deadlock as a threadbare excuse to break international law and pursue his self-serving agenda. All the while, workers and families in the North are without a government as they struggle in a cost-of-living crisis.Is gníomh contúirteach de mheon mímhacánta í reachtaíocht Rialtas na Breataine chun an prótacal a shárú. Tá cur chuige aontaithe Oireachtais ag teastáil uainn chun leasanna na hÉireann a chosaint.Ní dhéanfaidh Boris Johnson bulaíocht ar Éirinn. We need to take an all-of-Oireachtas approach in standing up to Boris Johnson’s renewed attempt to bully Ireland. We will not be bullied.We know we are not alone. Boris Johnson’s dangerous move has been strongly condemned in the United States, in Europe and indeed across the world. In the spirit of unity, does the Taoiseach agree the actions of the British Government are shameful, reckless and dangerous? Does he agree we must now mobilise all forces in support of the Good Friday Agreement and for Ireland’s prosperity to ensure Boris Johnson is faced down?I thank the Taoiseach for his response. We are in agreement that this course of action is reckless, but I would equally describe it as shameful and dangerous. The rationale for these actions are well understood and the logic is entirely self-serving. Boris Johnson is quite prepared, through all manner and means, to do what it takes to hold on to power. He is quite prepared to use political unionism in the North as a prop in that wider drama. That is what is happening here. He has actively colluded with the DUP to ensure we have no government in the North. Then he cites political deadlock as an excuse for these actions, which, as the Taoiseach correctly pointed out, aim to breach international law.It is very important Boris Johnson does not succeed. It is very important he is faced down. This is about the protocol in the first instance but it is also about something, as the Taoiseach will appreciate, much wider and much more profound than that. The Tory Government is pursuing a hostile, damaging attack against the Good Friday Agreement. It is as simple as that. How does the Taoiseach propose to mobilise allies in support of the agreement to face Boris Johnson down.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-05-31	---	1	"The Government's failure to plan for the recovery of Ireland's tourism sector has come home to roost in a fairly catastrophic fashion. Families are missing out on holidays because of long delays in issuing passports, hotels are charging between €350 and €400 for one night and now the State's main airport is experiencing chaos. Dublin Airport on Sunday was a nightmare for those caught up in the mayhem. People waited hours in queues that stretched outside the terminal buildings. Passengers received no communication, updates or explanations for the delays. Indeed, many had not even made it to the security check before their flights took off without them. More than 1,000 people missed their flights. Big money had to be forked out for hotel rooms, connecting flights were missed and would-be holidaymakers had their holidays ruined. Now, confusion surrounding what any compensation package will cover is sowing further frustration. This is not only about tourism and holidays. As a small island nation, we rely heavily on our airports to ensure our connectivity with the rest of the world. We simply cannot afford this chaos. Last week's events at the airport risk damaging Ireland's international reputation for international business and investment.All of this has its roots in the laying off 1,000 workers by the Dublin Airport Authority, DAA, during the pandemic and the subsequent lack of workforce planning as international travel reopened. At the time of those lay-offs, SIPTU's Jerry Brennan told the airport authority, ""you will need to be hiring people because your queues will be extending through the carparks"". What foresight. It seems he was the only person with any foresight. Yet, as we speak, Dublin Airport is still only at 70% of pre-Covid staffing levels. How can we expect the country’s main airport to operate at such low staff levels at the busiest time of the year? It was entirely foreseeable, after two years of lockdowns, that people would be very eager to get away on holidays again. Sunday’s chaos did not come out of the blue. There were warnings in the major delays in March and April. What action, if any, did the Minister for Transport, Deputy Eamon Ryan, take then to get ahead of all this? Did he meet the airport authority back in March to work out solutions and prevent an escalation of the problem? He is now calling for solutions in the wake of chaos. He has shown up again a day late and a dollar short.Teip thubaisteach ar thaobh an Rialtais agus an DAA a bhí sa phraiseach iomlán ag Aerfort Bhaile Átha Cliath ar an Domhnach. Ní hamháin gur chuir sé isteach go mór ar thaistealaithe ach rinne sé dochar do cháil idirnáisiúnta na hÉireann. An bhfuil muid ag súil le níos mó den chineál ruaille buaille sin in Aerfort Bhaile Átha Cliath an deireadh seachtaine seo?Of course the Dublin Airport Authority should be held responsible for its part in this mess but let us be very clear on this. When the operation of the most important airport in the State breaks down, it is the business of the Government to get ahead of that. The public is in disbelief at this fiasco and those planning to travel through Dublin Airport this bank holiday weekend are now very worried. Can the Minister guarantee today that we are not facing more chaos at Dublin Airport this weekend?The Minister said there was a significant political intervention in March and April, when these problems emerged. I have to tell him, that intervention did not succeed in its purpose and Sunday showed us the evidence of that. The airport is still operating understaffed, at 70% of its pre-Covid strength. The management of the Dublin Airport Authority, it seems to me, grossly misjudged what the capacity requirements would be as travel reopened, as was always going to be the case.I must say I do not hear anything from the Minister, as a Minister in government, that would reassure me or reassure the public that in fact the airport authority or the Government have got on top of this issue. I ask the Minister again to perhaps be more categoric and reassuring for the public. Will he tell us we are not going to face scenes such as those we saw on Sunday again? Is he satisfied that is the case? Is he satisfied the airport authority can and will mobilise the required numbers of staff, including full use of overtime, over the coming bank holiday weekend?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-05-25	---	1	Who do you write the cheque to?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-05-18	---	1	Yesterday, I again raised with the Taoiseach the importance of the Government securing public ownership of the site on which the new national maternity hospital will be built. I also expressed my astonishment that neither the Taoiseach nor the Minister for Health had made any substantial effort to convince St. Vincent's Healthcare Group to transfer that land to the State. Furthermore, I proposed that the Taoiseach, the Tánaiste and the Minister for Health, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, should meet urgently with the board of that group to negotiate such a transfer. This clean, clear transaction would be the best outcome as it would ensure that we would have a public maternity hospital built on public land. That is what the Sinn Féin motion, which is to be voted on by the Dáil tonight, calls for. The Taoiseach stated that the Government will not oppose the motion, so can I take it that the Government's position is to secure State ownership of the land and that it will now engage in that high-level negotiation with St. Vincent's Healthcare Group to achieve this? That will be the position of the Dáil after tonight's vote and the Government should act on its instruction.The public want clarity, but the truth is that the Government has sown confusion, distrust and unease about its plan. We have had two weeks of a consultation that was not really a consultation at all. The Taoiseach said that he was open to changes and suggestions, but he ignored and pushed back all suggestions and went ahead with the original deal. He and the Minister, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, said they engaged with St. Vincent's Healthcare Group to secure State ownership of the land, but St. Vincent's Healthcare Group said they did not and the Taoiseach responded by saying that he did. The Sinn Féin motion articulates a clear call for public ownership of the site and it is now clear that the Government will, in effect, support that motion. Let us get the clarity that people want. State ownership of the site is the best way to safeguard an investment of almost €1 billion of taxpayers' money. It is also the best way to end conclusively any fear of residual religious dogma compromising the delivery of health services for women. I do not have to rehearse again the harrowing history that gives rise to such anxieties.Everybody in the Dáil and beyond wants the new hospital built. We want and need a new era in maternity care for women in Ireland, and we should accept and acknowledge each other's bona fides in that regard. However, we must get this right. We have to get the best deal and the best arrangement to achieve that ambition. Ba cheart don Rialtas an rud ceart a dhéanamh anois. Ba cheart dóibh dul i dteagmháil le Grúpa Sláinte Naomh Uinseann chun an suíomh seo a fháil faoi úinéireacht an Stáit. The Sinn Féin motion this evening presents an opportunity for everyone to vote for the best approach. Given that the Taoiseach is not opposing the motion, will he commit to leading the Government in an engagement with St Vincent's Healthcare Group to secure this site in State ownership?Indeed it is time. That is nine long years. For a very long time women in midwifery, and all concerned in obstetrics and the care and provision of services for women, have been calling for proper investment in maternity services and health services for women. There is no great surprise in that. We all share that ambition. The hospital has to get built.The only fog and confusion are what is generated by the Taoiseach. I asked him a question. We have a motion coming before the Dáil this evening, which is crystal clear. It sets out very clearly a call from the Oireachtas for full public ownership of the land. To be clear, by that I mean a clean transfer of ownership in perpetuity to the State of that site. I understand that the Government will support the motion, or at least it does not propose to vote against it. Therefore, I can only surmise that the Government accepts that the best outcome is full ownership in that manner. Given that the Government will support the motion, or at least will not oppose it, I ask the Taoiseach if he will act on the will of the Dáil and if he will engage with St. Vincent's Healthcare Group----------to secure the ambition of that motion and the expressed will of the Dáil.So why are-----
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-05-18	---	2	I want to return, if I can, to the Milne family - to Ryan and Kyle and their parents, Gillian and Darren - whose circumstances were outlined earlier. Gillian and Darren have struggled for years to secure the appropriate services and school placement for their young boys. In his response to Deputy Bacik, it sounded as though the Taoiseach was laying culpability for this at the feet of schools. I want to challenge that. I accept absolutely that the legislative framework has to ensure inclusion, and not for one moment will I carry the can for any school that would seek to exclude a child. However, there has to be a level of honesty here. There is absolutely an issue around resourcing, also. Furthermore, the courts in this land have found that the Government has broken the law in respect of the Disability Act 2005. The State has not been honourable----------in honouring the law in respect of those with disabilities. What is the Government's plan for increased resources in order that Kyle, Ryan and others like them can avail of the services that they are entitled to?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-05-17	---	1	The Cabinet this afternoon signed off on the deal for the new national maternity hospital. Instead of securing a clean-cut transaction where the site will come into public ownership, the deal ensures the hospital will have a private landlord under a very convoluted ownership model. This is the wrong decision. It falls short of protecting the State's proposed investment of between €800 million and €1 billion of taxpayers' money. It is obvious that the best way to safeguard this investment and allay public concern is for the Government to secure the transfer of the land into State ownership by means of a clear and explicit agreement that ensures we get a publicly built national maternity hospital on publicly owned land. I asked the Taoiseach several times, together with the Tánaiste and the Minister for Health, Deputy Donnelly, to get around the table with the St. Vincent's Healthcare Group in order to convince it to agree to that transfer. I am of the view that such a high-level Government initiative would have yielded success.Yesterday, at a meeting of the Joint Committee on Health, the St. Vincent's Healthcare Group confirmed the Sisters of Charity transferred the land to the group without precondition. This means that there is no legal barrier to the land transfer. It is entirely within the gift of the group. Yet it transpires that far from proactively seeking the best outcome, the Taoiseach and the Government made no real effort to secure State ownership of that land. Last week, the Minister for Health told the Dáil he had formally requested the land be transferred to the State. However, what the chair of the St. Vincent's Healthcare Group told the committee yesterday directly contradicts the Minister. Mr. Menton said that the last time the State directly engaged with the group as regards bringing land into public ownership was five years ago. It gets worse because Mr. Menton also said the group has received no correspondence from the Taoiseach requesting the land be transferred to the State. This is something the Taoiseach later confirmed to the media. We know now that neither he nor the Minister for Health made any serious or meaningful effort to bring this land into State ownership.The Taoiseach came before the House and told us that such a transaction was not possible, but the truth is that he did not even bother to ask. He has now signed off on a deal that fails to provide the best protection for almost €1 billion of taxpayers' money and copper-fastens an ownership model whereby a critical piece of public infrastructure will have a private landlord. Is an socrú a shínigh an Rialtas ar maidin an socrú mícheart don ospidéal náisiúnta máithreachais nua. An bealach is fearr chun infheistíocht an Stáit a chosaint ná má aimsíonn an Rialtas úinéireacht Stáit ar an talamh. Everyone in the House wants this hospital built. We want it built quickly and we want a new departure in maternity care. I absolutely accept the Taoiseach's bona fides in all those regards but what is at issue is the failure of the Government to secure the land in public ownership. This is big stuff. The contract the Government signed locks the State into a deal whereby the State does not have ownership of the site for the national maternity hospital. I ask the Taoiseach to directly explain why neither he nor the Minister for Health made any real or significant effort to secure State ownership of that land.And I am struck that the Taoiseach is in any way surprised that there is widespread clamour, and has been for some time, for proper investment in maternal and neonatal care and women's healthcare more generally. Everyone wants that. I can assure the Taoiseach that I want that. I want to see the speedy delivery of first-class services of excellence for the women of this country that for far too long we were denied. He also ought to be struck that there is no doubt in the mind of the St. Vincent's Healthcare Group as to who owns the land. It is very clear. It is very clear that it is the landowner.It was also clear in setting out at the committee meeting that there was no meaningful engagement on the part of the Taoiseach or the Minister for Health to secure State ownership of that land. It could have been done by means of a simple transfer, which, bear in mind, had been promised initially. That is the St. Vincent's Healthcare Group's version of events. I would like the Taoiseach to confirm and set out for the Dáil what engagement he had, if he claims he had any, to secure this site into State ownership. When did that happen? Is the Taoiseach saying that the chair of the St. Vincent's Healthcare Group is incorrect or that he has misled an Oireachtas committee?Pardon?Is that correspondence from the Minister?We will not own it.What did the Taoiseach do to secure the site? That is my question.What did the Taoiseach do?The leader of Fianna Fáil is not answering them; that is the problem.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-05-11	---	1	"Yesterday, I raised with the Taoiseach the real and serious concerns held by many regarding the ownership of the new national maternity hospital. The Taoiseach dismissed these concerns again and doubled down on his characterisation of this issue as a ""red herring"". However, last night in a letter to the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Health, two HSE board members, Professor Deirdre Madden and Dr. Sarah McLoughlin, restated their strong opposition to the ownership deal. In the letter, they describe the ownership deal as ""unsatisfactory"" and state:While the shares have since been transferred from the [...] Sisters of Charity to a new company, St Vincent's Holding CLG, we believe that in the interest of the public trust and confidence in this new project, there should be absolute clarity on the separation of Church and State.They go on to observe that the necessary public trust and confidence ""would be better achieved if the State owned the land on which the hospital [will be] built"". Now that comes from two eminently qualified professionals who were centrally involved in planning for the new maternity hospital. Their concerns, it must be said, mirror those held by many of us on the Opposition benches and, indeed, by many Deputies on the Government benches, as well as by people right across society.I put it to the Taoiseach that the best way to allay fears and to resolve this problem is for the Government to secure full public ownership of the land and for us to have a clear transaction in which the St. Vincent's Healthcare Group, SVHG, transfers the land directly to the State. That after all, was the initial promise or undertaking from the Sisters of Charity. This would provide absolute, airtight clarity. It would ensure the best protection of the State's interest in what will be a very expensive project. Additionally, it would ensure it is the State’s health authorities that set the range of and the clinical governance for services provided at the hospital.I think this is just a matter of common sense, but the Taoiseach has pushed back against this common sense in claiming that the current labyrinthine arrangements amount to public ownership. They do not. Repeating the refrain of a ""tenner a year"" does not change that reality. There is no doubt in my mind that the St. Vincent’s Healthcare Group has to move. It must step up to find a resolution to this issue, but this Government must also step up. Through inaction, the Government will be acquiescing to and colluding in a deal and an arrangement that does not fully protect the public interest.Tá bunús maith leis an imní maidir leis an ospidéal máithreachais nua. Léiríonn na saincheisteanna tromchúiseacha a léirigh an tOllamh Madden agus an Dr. McLoughlin go bhfuil an imní chéanna ar dhaoine ar fud na tíre. Is é an bealach is fearr chun an fhadhb seo a réiteach ná don Rialtas úinéireacht Stáit ar an talamh a aimsiú. We all want to see this hospital built and built quickly. It can and must represent a huge step forward for the modern, progressive healthcare that women in Ireland deserve. Therefore, I put this proposition to the Taoiseach again in the hope, more than the expectation, that I will get a clear answer. Will he, the Tánaiste and the Minister for Health get around the table with representatives of the SVHG and convince them to transfer that land directly to the State?As the Taoiseach knows, for a very long time, midwives, clinicians and all concerned - and women of course - have been very much in favour of a new maternity hospital and proper investment in maternity services. That should not surprise any of us. The Taoiseach said there is an unanswered question. Let me put this to him. He says that €10 a year for 299 or 300 years is effective public ownership. The question is this. That being the case, why is it that there has not simply been a clean transaction and a transfer of this land to the State? That is actually the question. If the Taoiseach is saying that it is public ownership in all but name, why is it not full public ownership? That is the first question. The second question is this. Given that the State is the key anchor of the voluntary hospitals, including St. Vincent's University Hospital, which receives substantial State money, the Government has a very powerful hand to play. Why is it that the Taoiseach is resisting my very reasonable request----------that he, the Tánaiste and the Minister for Health lead from the front and resolve this issue?Why not make public ownership in all but name actual, legally certain public ownership of this land? That is actually the question.I am not arguing there is a conspiracy; I am arguing for public ownership.It should be a public hospital."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-05-11	---	2	There is a long-established pattern of the Israeli state targeting journalists who are covering the brutal occupation of Palestine. This systematic targeting has resulted in complaints being filed with the International Criminal Court and the United Nations. This morning, we awoke to the horrific news that Al Jazeera journalist Shireen Abu Akleh is the latest victim of this. She was shot dead - shot in the face by an Israeli sniper while doing her job covering an Israeli army attack on a Palestinian refugee camp in Jenin in the occupied West Bank. Another reporter was shot in the back. Both were clearly visible as journalists. They were wearing blue flak jackets. Shireen's killing has been described as an execution by the Israeli Defence Force. What intervention will the Government make on this matter, including through Ireland's position on the UN Security Council, to ensure Israel is held accountable for this?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-05-10	---	1	"Speaking on the radio yesterday morning, the Taoiseach described questions regarding ownership of the new national maternity hospital as a “red herring”. That is a very unfair characterisation of very genuine concerns that are grounded in decades of women’s experiences of healthcare in this State. The Taoiseach's dismissal of these concerns is particularly disappointing given that his comments pre-empt Oireachtas examination of the Government’s proposal. The process and debate to take place this week at the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Health and in the Dáil are undermined when the head of Government brushes aside the central questions before the scrutiny even begins. Why bother allowing for the scrutiny of the proposals at all if the Taoiseach presents the current deal as a  and says the Government will be ""pressing ahead"" with the plan regardless of the outcome of Oireachtas deliberations? That is the wrong way to deal with this issue.The Government proposes to invest between €800 million and €1 billion of taxpayers’ money in building a new and much-needed national maternity hospital. It simply makes sense that the land on which that hospital is to be built is owned by the State. This means a very clean transaction whereby the land is transferred directly to the State. That was the original plan so why do we get this convoluted, messy ownership structure instead? The answer to that question is all about the financial power of the land. It is about the St. Vincent’s Healthcare Group retaining control of the land so it can use its value as leverage for future financial transactions. It is about the private interests of this group trumping the public good and a Government that is willing to let this happen. The Taoiseach can talk all day about the land costing only a tenner a year but what he does not say is that the St. Vincent’s Healthcare Group retains the right to impose a rent of €850,000 a year if a dispute about the operation of the hospital arises in the future. This gives the private landlord significant leverage and control and it most certainly does not amount to public ownership, as the Taoiseach has claimed.Genuine concerns have also been expressed about the lack of clarity regarding the definition of ""clinical appropriateness"" in the legal documents. While the Minister says he has legal guarantees, it will be judges and not politicians who will adjudicate on any potential dispute and any legal interpretation.For this and other reasons, the ownership of the site is not a red herring. Everybody wants this new hospital and we want it built quickly, but we need to get it right.Is é an rud is ciallmhaire ná go dtógfar an t-ospidéal máithreachais nua ar thalamh poiblí. Is é seo an bealach is fearr chun na himní atá ar dhaoine maidir le neamhspleáchas cliniciúil an ospidéil a laghdú agus chun infheistíocht shuntasach an Stáit i gcúram sláinte forásach nua-aimseartha do mhná a chosaint.This convoluted and complex ownership model is the wrong footing on which to proceed. What we need is a public maternity hospital built on public land, and this can still be done. Will the Taoiseach, the Tánaiste and the Minister for Health now get around a table with St. Vincent’s Healthcare Group and convince it to transfer the land directly to the State, as was the original plan and the original commitment from the Sisters of Charity?Yes, you do.Let us have facts and honesty then, shall we? Holles Street is certainly not fit for purpose. It is not fit for purpose because of underinvestment by Government after Government.By the way, it is even worse than just that. It is not just Holles Street. The Rotunda Hospital and all of our maternity services are similarly under pressure and, similarly, Government after Government looked the other way.What makes it even worse again is that Government after Government in the history of this State colluded with religious dogma to deny us, as women, what we were entitled to by way of healthcare. When we raise these legitimate, well-founded questions in a spirit of honesty, we do that borne of bitter experience and a determination that that will never happen again.The Taoiseach has talked about a tenner a year for 300 years. He is trying to pass that off as public ownership. He says the land was gifted.The crux of this issue is that the land has not been gifted.Let me put my question again, a Cheann Comhairle.I ask the Taoiseach, along with the Tánaiste and the Minister of Health, to go back to St. Vincent's Healthcare Group, which the Taoiseach says has no---------ulterior motive in the building of this hospital. Let us take it on its word and tell it to make this a clean transaction and gift and transfer that site to the State. In one fell swoop----------all of our concerns would be resolved. Will the Taoiseach do that, yes or no?How are we doing that?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-05-04	---	1	"Maternity care and healthcare for women has for too long been an afterthought and even taboo in this State. The roll call of victims of an aggressive religious dogma in healthcare settings is heartbreaking. Far too many Irish women have paid far too high a price. So the new national maternity hospital is absolutely vital for the delivery of modern, progressive healthcare for women in Ireland and everybody wants to see this hospital built and built quickly. But we also have to get it right.Yesterday, the Minister for Health, Deputy Donnelly, brought a memo to the Cabinet seeking the green light for the development of the hospital on the St. Vincent's site. This was, I believe, a premature move and I welcome that decision has been paused. It is essential that the Oireachtas is afforded the opportunity to scrutinise, consider and debate the details of this proposal. It is right that this will now happen.The Taoiseach is aware there are legitimate concerns surrounding the ownership structure and the clinical independence of the hospital and there is strong grounds for these concerns given the history of that relationship between church and State which denied healthcare services to generations of women. The Minister for Health stated this morning that he can absolutely 100% guarantee that all women's healthcare services allowable under Irish law will be provided at the new hospital. These guarantees must be cast-iron legal protections and not simply rhetorical assurances. In the same interview, the Minister for Health referred to criticism of the ownership model as a “red herring”. That is not a fair characterisation of what are well-founded concerns. The State proposes an investment of €800 million possibly increasing to €1 billion when all is said and done. That is taxpayers’ money; the State should own the hospital and the ground that the hospital is built on outright. That is simple common sense.Under the Government proposal, we will own the building but not the land which will remain in private ownership. That makes absolutely no sense when the State is footing the bill. We need a publicly built maternity hospital on publicly owned land, delivering public healthcare services for women to a standard of excellence. Instead what is proposed is a convoluted maze in which the Sisters of Charity have transferred the land to a holdings company that then leases the land to the State. It is all very messy, unnecessarily so, and it is stoking unease and worry. People ask why on earth is this happening. Surely the best solution is for the Sisters of Charity to have gifted the land to the State and to ensure and guarantee full public ownership of the entire hospital. This would protect the State's investment and address so many of the concerns of so many who fear still that religious dogma could compromise the delivery of healthcare.Tá an t-ospidéal náisiúnta máithreachais nua róthábhachtach. Caithfimid é a fháil i gceart chun neamhspleáchas cliniciúil a chinntiú agus infheistíocht phoiblí a chosaint. Ní mór don Rialtas úinéireacht Stáit iomlán a chinntiú den talamh ar a bhfuil an t-ospidéal le tógáil.We have to get this right and we have to work together to get it right. I will put the proposition simply: we need to achieve full State ownership for the new hospital and the land on which the hospital is built. This has to be done before any contracts are signed.Will the Taoiseach work urgently to convince St. Vincent's Healthcare Group to gift that land to the State?Undoubtedly, all the documentation, the publication of which I welcome, will be studied, scrutinised and considered very carefully. However, I raised with the Taoiseach the ownership of the land and he has responded by reminding us we are looking at a 300-year lease at a cost of €10 per year.That begs the question as to why lease on those terms and why did the Sisters of Charity just not make a clean transaction of it and gift the land to the State. That would copper-fasten and clarify the absolute public ownership of the facility. It would give the reassurances that are necessary, not for a small minority but for wider public opinion in terms of the governance, the independence etc. of the hospital.By the way, I accept the Taoiseach's bona fides in wishing to see this project advance. As somebody who availed of maternity services in my time in this State, I can tell the Taoiseach we all have a vested interest in seeing that advance. I am not challenging that for a moment. I am raising this issue of ownership because it is a matter of genuine concern.I put it to the Taoiseach again that we work together to move from this convoluted leasing arrangement to simply a gifting of this land to the State so that we have a public first-class centre of excellence for women, publicly built on public land.No. Legally, it is not.Is the Taoiseach's answer to my question, ""No""?Jeepers, I did not think I could have been clearer.I have raised the issue of the ownership of the land. I would have thought that was abundantly clear."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-04-27	---	1	The Residential Tenancies Board, RTB, published its quarterly rent index this morning and it shows again that the Government's housing policy is failing dismally. In fact, it makes for fairly devastating reading, particularly for those in housing need and for those who now have their lives defined by this never-ending housing crisis. The report tells us that rents have doubled since 2011 - in a decade. We saw another big hike in new rents across the State for the last three months of last year and the average new rent in Dublin now stands at nearly €2,000. That is off the wall. I have said it so many times in this Chamber and I say it again - this is a social catastrophe. The rent crisis is hammering a generation today and robbing them of their aspirations for tomorrow, for their future. This is no way to live. It is deeply, deeply unfair. In fact, it is a horrible situation for anyone.Of course, this is not simply an urban crisis. Rural Ireland fares no better. Counties like Donegal, Longford, Roscommon and Leitrim have all experienced massive jumps. In fact, in many towns and villages now there are no homes available to rent at all. Where are people supposed to live? How can they hope to put a roof over their heads, build a decent life or raise a family, if that is what they wish to do? How can ordinary people, families and workers be expected to pay these rip-off rents and somehow still find money to pay soaring energy bills, big childcare fees and to put food on the table?Meanwhile, house prices go up and up and many have given up on the dream of ever owning their own home. The number of properties to rent continues to fall right across the State and this does not just push up the cost of renting; it is also forcing many families into homelessness. Since the Government launched its housing plan, the scourge of homelessness has escalated once more. We are now close to breaking the pre-Covid peak of 10,000 homeless people. That, by the way, is just the official figure.The facts speak for themselves. The Taoiseach and the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, have failed spectacularly to get a grip on this crisis. The fact is that their housing plan is not fit for purpose because it is underpinned by the same policies that got us into this mess in the first place. Theip ar pholasaí tithíochta an Taoisigh. Teastaíonn freagairt éigeandála uainn a oibríonn do gach duine a bhfuil riachtanas tithíochta acu. Ciallaíonn sé sin cíosanna a ghearradh, cosc a chur ar mhéaduithe cíosa ar feadh trí bliana agus plean ón Rialtas a chuireann an méid tithe sóisialta agus tithe ar phraghas réasúnta atá ag teastáil ar fáil.Housing can be fixed. Extortionate rents can be tackled. This generation can have the opportunity of a good life but it is not going to happen by chance. It requires a big change in direction and ambition from Government. Those caught up in this crisis need a real plan that leaves no person or family behind. There are things the Government can do now that will make a big difference. It can cut rents by putting €1,500 back into renters' pockets through a tax rebate and it can ban rent increases for three years. I have asked the Taoiseach countless times for this and I am asking again today. The Government can change its housing plan and ramp it up for social and affordable housing.We seem to be going around in circles here. The Taoiseach does not dispute the facts in the report from the RTB as presented this morning. I am assuming he does not contest the fact that rents are out of control right across this State, that people are struggling to make these rents, that house prices continue to climb and climb or that homelessness is again at crisis proportions. All of these facts indicate that the policy the Government is pursuing is getting it wrong. The Government is getting it wrong.I asked the Taoiseach about two specific measures where the Government can get it right. I asked him about a tax credit and tax rebate for the hundreds of thousands of renters caught in the grip of a cost of living crisis. Will he introduce a tax rebate that puts a month's rent back into renters' pockets? Will he finally move to instigate a rent freeze for three years? I ask him to answer these questions for me directly.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-04-27	---	2	Today the Dáil will vote on Sinn Féin's motion to stop the ban on the sale of turf. The Taoiseach has indicated that it is his intention to vote against the motion. He will do this despite the frustration felt right across rural communities. He will do it despite the fact that he could not even convince his own backbenchers of the merits of the plan. He will do it despite the fact that people in rural Ireland, particularly older people and people on lower incomes with no alternative, will struggle badly.I want to ask the Taoiseach again not to proceed with this and for good sense, for common sense, to prevail. This ban is the wrong move at the wrong time. It is unfair, it alienates communities and it will be unworkable. I ask the Taoiseach to do what he has not done thus far and to give an assurance that he will ditch this plan.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-04-26	---	1	The days of the mass harvesting of turf are over. This is best underscored by the fact that Bord na Móna has moved from its traditional brown peat business to become a leading and profitable champion of renewables. The Government's proposed outright ban on the sale of turf has caused real distress and frustration for rural communities. The proposal is unfair, unworkable and should not go ahead. The timing of the proposed ban could not be worse, as people are being hammered by the cost-of-living crisis that has seen energy bills go through the roof and that has put enormous pressure on people’s pockets. For many families in rural Ireland, turf is their one affordable way of heating their homes. Their only credible alternative is home heating oil, the price of which, as the Taoiseach knows, has doubled in the past year. Yet the Government has sat on its hands on this score. Nothing has been done to reduce these extortionate prices. In fact, the Government's actions will drive these costs higher.It is therefore not hard to see why people in rural households are so frustrated because the Government is placing them between a rock and a hard place. It will ban the source of fuel on which they depend while, at the same time, refusing to tackle the soaring cost of the alternative. How is that fair? The ban on the sale of turf is a punishment for people who have no alternative way to heat their home. It will be particularly hard on older people and those who are on low incomes living in rural communities.The Government's ineptitude in its handling of this proposed ban has been nothing short of astonishing. Deputies and Ministers are at sixes and sevens, sowing mass confusion and spreading mixed messages. Over the Easter break, the Tánaiste, Deputy Varadkar, and the Minister, Deputy Ryan, rode a merry-go-round of contradictions. The Minister, Deputy Ryan, said the ban was going ahead. The Tánaiste then said the ban was being paused. The Minister then responded by saying the ban is not being paused. The Government did not seem to know if it was coming or going. Then, on Sunday last, just to muddy the waters even further, the Minister, Deputy Ryan, said on the radio that the guidelines for the ban are only in draft. All the while, Government backbenchers - Deputies from Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael in rural areas - are falling over themselves to tell their constituents they do not support the proposed ban, with one going so far as to call the whole affair daft. They claim it is all the work of the Green Party and nothing to do with them. Those Deputies will have their golden opportunity this evening to show the people they represent that they are actually serious. They can put a stop to the ban on the sale of turf by voting for the Sinn Féin motion.Tá an plean atá molta ag an Rialtas chun cosc a chur ar mhón a dhíol míchothram agus do-oibrithe.Ní fhéadfadh an t-am a bheith níos measa, nuair atá oibrithe agus teaghlaigh ag streachailt le billí fuinnimh, atá ag ardú, a íoc. Cuireann an cosc seo pionós ar theaghlaigh thuaithe nach bhfuil aon bhealach eile acu a dtithe a théamh. Ní féidir leis an gcosc seo dul ar aghaidh.What we need right now is clarity on what exactly has been agreed by Cabinet. Households who rely on turf to heat their homes need certainty as to what they face into. The certainty that the Taoiseach should and must give them is to make absolutely clear that this turf sale ban will go no further. I invite the Taoiseach to give that assurance to those households today.Did you not know that?Of course, fair and balanced debate means we have to stick to the fact. The fact is nothing has been done in respect of home heating oil. That is a fact.Do not attribute falsehoods to me by advancing a falsehood of your own. The cost of home heating oil has more than doubled in the past year and the Government has done nothing to intervene. In fact, its proposed course of action will drive the cost of home heating oil up further.To return to the turf ban-----The Taoiseach accepts what I have said. He has accepted that the ban as proposed by the Minister, Deputy Ryan, is utterly wrong and utterly unfair and will leave people in rural Ireland, particularly older people and people on lower incomes in a really difficult place. I invite the Taoiseach again to clarify that there will be no ban and that the proposed ban, whether it is the finished item or in draft form, is officially from today ditched and assurance is given to people living in rural Ireland not alone that they can harvest their own turf but that those who do not have turbary rights can access that turf to burn in their grates to heat their homes. That is what we need. We need clarity. The Taoiseach should not talk in riddles. He should tell us that the madcap, half-baked, unfair notion advanced by Eamon Ryan is now officially ditched.If the Taoiseach is not prepared to do that, I remind his backbenchers they will have the opportunity to take their stand this evening by voting in favour of the Sinn Féin motion that proposes the ditching, stopping and halting of this proposed ban in its entirety. That is what we need.Will the Taoiseach answer my question?It is turf.I asked about turf.He is not answering the question.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-04-06	---	1	Ba mhaith liom mo bhuíochas a ghabháil leis an Uachtarán Zelenskyy as ucht a óráid ar maidin. I want to extend our deep appreciation and gratitude to President Zelenskyy for his address on this historic day. I want to acknowledge the presence of the diplomatic corps, but in particular, our friend, Ambassador Gerasko, and her staff. I want to pay them a particular commendation for their work in these very trying times.We have heard directly from President Zelenskyy, in the rawest, most harrowing and heartbreaking of terms, testimony of the vicious war crimes committed by the Russian military in Ukraine. We have been set a challenge. Innocent civilians have been executed with their arms tied behind their backs. There have been horrific accounts of rape and torture and the brutalisation by the powerful of vulnerable ordinary citizens in their war-torn country. These are crime against the Ukrainian people and these are crimes against humanity. Russia must be held accountable for its barbarism, and justice must be done. These human rights violations and grave breaches of the Geneva Convention demand investigation by the International Criminal Court and prosecutions to follow. The truth is that Russia has turned its back on dialogue and peace. For 42 days and nights, it has chosen war. It has chosen brutality. It has chosen the violation of international law. Russia has closed the door on dialogue and through its criminal actions it has thus far rejected avenues for diplomacy.Far from demonstrating a willingness to engage in peace negotiations, Russia has escalated its ferocious violence through the indiscriminate targeting of civilians.All the while, however, the Russian Embassy in Ireland and Ambassador Yury Filatov have acted as unwavering and unapologetic propagandists for his country's illegal invasion of Ukraine. Yesterday, in the face of evidence of Russian war crimes in Bucha and other areas surrounding Kyiv, the embassy and the ambassador claimed that this evidence was fabricated. They described it as another stage of the disinformation war against Russia. This shameful response demonstrates the depths to which the Putin regime will stoop to justify the savagery of Russia's military aggression. The Russian ambassador wants us to ignore the evidence before our very eyes. Well, Mr. Filatov, we have heard the accounts of murders carried out by your soldiers reported by numerous credible sources. We have seen the aerial photographs of human remains left scattered by the side of the road. We have seen the cars carrying white flags, indicating civilian passengers, riddled with shrapnel. The evidence of such atrocities condemns Russia before the world, and the world will not turn a blind eye. It is long past time for Ambassador Filatov to be expelled from Ireland. Ba cheart ambasadóir na Rúise in Éirinn a chur abhaile anois. Caithfear an Rialtas é sin a dhéanamh gan mhoill. Yesterday Lithuania became the first EU member state to expel its Russian ambassador. It did so as an action to uphold human rights and justice. I commend Lithuania on that and believe our country should follow suit. That would be a most powerful action for us to take as a militarily neutral, non-aligned State as we too stand for human rights and justice. I call on the Taoiseach and the Government to act now.Of course, we must do more. The people of Ireland stand with Ukraine. We strongly support Ukraine's stated desire to join the European Union. We must respond to the humanitarian crisis by providing refuge to those fleeing for their lives. As an elected member of the UN Security Council, we must use every available avenue to press for the de-escalation of conflict, for a ceasefire, for dialogue and for a Russian withdrawal and an end to this terrible war.Ireland supports economic sanctions against Russia. We must intensify those sanctions. We should not have to convince anybody of the need to hit the Russian elites and oligarchs in every possible way. The revelations of these war crimes and atrocities demand such an intensification of sanctions. I welcome the announcement by the European Commission President, Ursula von der Leyen, of a new round of measures, including the ban on the import of Russian coal, the transaction ban on four Russian banks and the ban on Russian vessels from EU ports. The impact of these sanctions creates a real economic challenge for Ireland and across the EU, but Russia and Vladimir Putin must feel the full weight and consequences of this invasion. Russia should not doubt our resolve or our solidarity with the beleaguered people of Ukraine, a people who, as we speak, fight for their lives, fight for their freedom and fight for the survival of their nation. They fight a war of liberation from tyranny and for the right to endure and to go on, and they will. We know that a nation is a living, breathing thing. Ukraine lives, Ukraine breathes and Ukraine will go on.Through its heroic struggle, its people have reaffirmed in all of us the values of sovereignty, justice and democracy and one day the invader will retreat, the coloniser will leave, and Russia's armies will go home. The strength of the Ukrainian people and the support of her allies will see to that. On that day, Ukraine, deeply scarred but unconquered and unbowed, will start to heal and the people of Ukraine will begin again. Shattered cities, broken homes and displaced families and communities will come together once more and shape Ukraine's destiny.In that spirit of hope and standing on the foundation stones of our shared humanity, Ukraine will emerge once more into a new dawn of peace and freedom. Ireland stands with you now in your dark days and we will stand with you yet in the light of a victory of humanity over injustice, of light over dark, of life over death.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-04-06	---	1	Ba mhaith liom mo bhuíochas a ghabháil leis an Uachtarán Zelenskyy as ucht a óráid ar maidin. I want to extend our deep appreciation and gratitude to President Zelenskyy for his address on this historic day. I want to acknowledge the presence of the diplomatic corps, but in particular, our friend, Ambassador Gerasko, and her staff. I want to pay them a particular commendation for their work in these very trying times.We have heard directly from President Zelenskyy, in the rawest, most harrowing and heartbreaking of terms, testimony of the vicious war crimes committed by the Russian military in Ukraine. We have been set a challenge. Innocent civilians have been executed with their arms tied behind their backs. There have been horrific accounts of rape and torture and the brutalisation by the powerful of vulnerable ordinary citizens in their war-torn country. These are crime against the Ukrainian people and these are crimes against humanity. Russia must be held accountable for its barbarism, and justice must be done. These human rights violations and grave breaches of the Geneva Convention demand investigation by the International Criminal Court and prosecutions to follow. The truth is that Russia has turned its back on dialogue and peace. For 42 days and nights, it has chosen war. It has chosen brutality. It has chosen the violation of international law. Russia has closed the door on dialogue and through its criminal actions it has thus far rejected avenues for diplomacy.Far from demonstrating a willingness to engage in peace negotiations, Russia has escalated its ferocious violence through the indiscriminate targeting of civilians.All the while, however, the Russian Embassy in Ireland and Ambassador Yury Filatov have acted as unwavering and unapologetic propagandists for his country's illegal invasion of Ukraine. Yesterday, in the face of evidence of Russian war crimes in Bucha and other areas surrounding Kyiv, the embassy and the ambassador claimed that this evidence was fabricated. They described it as another stage of the disinformation war against Russia. This shameful response demonstrates the depths to which the Putin regime will stoop to justify the savagery of Russia's military aggression. The Russian ambassador wants us to ignore the evidence before our very eyes. Well, Mr. Filatov, we have heard the accounts of murders carried out by your soldiers reported by numerous credible sources. We have seen the aerial photographs of human remains left scattered by the side of the road. We have seen the cars carrying white flags, indicating civilian passengers, riddled with shrapnel. The evidence of such atrocities condemns Russia before the world, and the world will not turn a blind eye. It is long past time for Ambassador Filatov to be expelled from Ireland. Ba cheart ambasadóir na Rúise in Éirinn a chur abhaile anois. Caithfear an Rialtas é sin a dhéanamh gan mhoill. Yesterday Lithuania became the first EU member state to expel its Russian ambassador. It did so as an action to uphold human rights and justice. I commend Lithuania on that and believe our country should follow suit. That would be a most powerful action for us to take as a militarily neutral, non-aligned State as we too stand for human rights and justice. I call on the Taoiseach and the Government to act now.Of course, we must do more. The people of Ireland stand with Ukraine. We strongly support Ukraine's stated desire to join the European Union. We must respond to the humanitarian crisis by providing refuge to those fleeing for their lives. As an elected member of the UN Security Council, we must use every available avenue to press for the de-escalation of conflict, for a ceasefire, for dialogue and for a Russian withdrawal and an end to this terrible war.Ireland supports economic sanctions against Russia. We must intensify those sanctions. We should not have to convince anybody of the need to hit the Russian elites and oligarchs in every possible way. The revelations of these war crimes and atrocities demand such an intensification of sanctions. I welcome the announcement by the European Commission President, Ursula von der Leyen, of a new round of measures, including the ban on the import of Russian coal, the transaction ban on four Russian banks and the ban on Russian vessels from EU ports. The impact of these sanctions creates a real economic challenge for Ireland and across the EU, but Russia and Vladimir Putin must feel the full weight and consequences of this invasion. Russia should not doubt our resolve or our solidarity with the beleaguered people of Ukraine, a people who, as we speak, fight for their lives, fight for their freedom and fight for the survival of their nation. They fight a war of liberation from tyranny and for the right to endure and to go on, and they will. We know that a nation is a living, breathing thing. Ukraine lives, Ukraine breathes and Ukraine will go on.Through its heroic struggle, its people have reaffirmed in all of us the values of sovereignty, justice and democracy and one day the invader will retreat, the coloniser will leave, and Russia's armies will go home. The strength of the Ukrainian people and the support of her allies will see to that. On that day, Ukraine, deeply scarred but unconquered and unbowed, will start to heal and the people of Ukraine will begin again. Shattered cities, broken homes and displaced families and communities will come together once more and shape Ukraine's destiny.In that spirit of hope and standing on the foundation stones of our shared humanity, Ukraine will emerge once more into a new dawn of peace and freedom. Ireland stands with you now in your dark days and we will stand with you yet in the light of a victory of humanity over injustice, of light over dark, of life over death.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-04-06	---	2	"Yesterday, I asked the Taoiseach to cancel the carbon tax hike scheduled for 1 May. Struggling households are under huge pressure trying to pay soaring energy bills. The very last thing they need is the Government adding to that pressure with a tax hike. Yesterday, the Taoiseach refused to cancel that increase and indicated that the Government is determined to press ahead with it. In that decision, the Government is ignoring the fact that every single euro counts for workers and families and that many households are literally down to the cents. If the Government proceeds with this, it will push ahead in the full knowledge that low-income workers, older people and rural communities have been hit especially hard.The Taoiseach did acknowledge yesterday that what he termed a ""wider initiative"" is required to tackle this unprecedented cost-of-living crisis, which has been driven by inflation levels not seen since the 1980s and exacerbated by Russia's illegal invasion of Ukraine. I am glad the Taoiseach has finally recognised the need for a comprehensive set of measures and an inclusive process to get the living costs down. This comes after months of resisting Sinn Féin's calls for exactly such a package. In February, we brought forward a broad suite of measures that would make a real difference and bring genuine relief and breathing space for households. We urged the Government to adopt these measures, which are realistic and deliverable. The Taoiseach refused to do that. We proposed a mini-budget that would target those areas during this crisis. Does the Taoiseach now accept the need for a mini-budget? Has the Government moved from its position of waiting until October to act? In other words, when will see this comprehensive set of measures? Will these measures include targeted cost-of-living payments to lower and middle-income workers and families? Will it include relief for renters? Will it include relief for childcare costs? We have proposed cutting these initially by one third. That is necessary to give parents breathing space. Above all, urgency is required on this matter because the fuel allowance is due to end on Friday. It is crucial that this payment is extended, initially for six weeks at the least, and that eligibility for it is expanded.Tá mion-bhuiséad ag teastáil uainn chun dul i ngleic leis na réimsí atá i gcroílár na géarchéime sa chostas maireachtála. Laghdóidh íocaíochtaí airgid díreach agus gníomhartha ó thaobh cíosanna, cúram páistí agus an liúntas breosla an costas maireachtála do gach duine.The Government can of course introduce a mini-budget to deliver direct cost-of-living payments, to cut rents and childcare fees and to extend the fuel allowance, but it must also scrap the carbon tax increase due on May Day. Although the Taoiseach clearly attaches little importance to this increase, the backbenchers in his own party and, it seems, in Fine Gael, have a very different view on this matter. I am asking the Taoiseach to seize the moment, to introduce measures that will cushion households and help give them some breathing space and, of course, to cancel the hike in carbon tax.I have asked the Taoiseach to set out what this comprehensive approach will amount to. It has to be all about bringing costs down. I ask again whether it will include measures to give relief to renters and if it will cut childcare costs. What other measures does the Government have in mind? We all agree that costs must come down. I also asked the Taoiseach to act with urgency. The Taoiseach should bear in mind that both finance Ministers in the Government have previously said they are not minded to do anything until October. Sitting this out until October is not a viable option because people are under pressure now. I reminded the Taoiseach that on Friday, we will see the end of the fuel allowance, which gives an indication of just how urgent these matters are. What is the Government's comprehensive set of measures? Is it a mini-budget? When will we see it? I put it to the Taoiseach that at a time when people have to choose between eating and heating their homes, he could not rationalise, much less justify, an increase in carbon tax.It is ending on Friday.The Taoiseach is talking down the clock. Can I have an answer?The Taoiseach has not answered.I asked the Taoiseach a straight question that he has refused to answer."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-04-05	---	1	"We are just three weeks away from the Government's carbon tax hike on 1 May. This is the same day that the latest round of energy price hikes from providers will kick in. The carbon tax will make life harder for workers and families who are already struggling to keep on top of their soaring energy bills. They live in dread, in panic and, in some cases, in fear. People are being fleeced by big energy companies, which are making bumper profits. It is crazy that the Government, which should act to protect households, will come along at the start of next month and pile on more pressure. Instead of supporting households, the Government will ratchet up pressure on families with a tax hike that adds to the already unaffordable price of home heating fuels. At the weekend, Ministers, including the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications, Deputy Eamon Ryan, vowed that the carbon tax increase will go ahead despite the extraordinary crisis that households face. Almost in the same breath, the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, told workers and families to save money by taking shorter showers and by driving less.That was the Government position on Sunday.Yesterday, the Taoiseach told the media the carbon tax is not a big issue in the grand scheme of things and that it was not a big deal. However, this is a big issue for households up and down the country where every euro counts and so a worn-out public is again left shaking their heads at the out-of-touch reaction from Ministers. People rightly ask where is the common sense and where is the sense of urgency or agility from the Government to respond to what is happening in people's daily lives. The carbon tax hike is the wrong decision at the wrong time. We have told the Government this time and again and more and more people are now coming to that view. Indeed, yesterday Dr. Cara Augustenborg of the Climate Change Advisory Council called for the hike to be deferred. This is an expert appointed by the Taoiseach's Minister to advise the Government on these matters. The Government's position is wrong and the Taoiseach must listen. People cannot afford a carbon tax increase. They do not have the money to give. Far too many lives are now defined by the awful choice between heating and eating. This hike can only make matters worse as it disproportionately affects those on low incomes, older people who struggle to stay warm and it will of course hit households in rural Ireland especially hard.Tá an t-ardú ar an gcáin charbóin ar an 1 Bealtaine an rogha mícheart ag an am mícheart. Tá teaghlaigh ag streachailt cheana féin le billí fuinnimh atá ag ardú as cuimse agus ní féidir leo an t-ardú seo a íoc. Caithfear stop a chur leis. It is time for the Taoiseach and Government to see sense because households have been hammered by more than 35 energy price increases in the last year and people are saying they cannot take any more. I want the Taoiseach to tell hard-pressed workers and families the Government will not add to pressure already on them. I want him to tell them Government will scrap the carbon tax hike due on 1 May and I would like him to give people that assurance today.We have made the case to the Taoiseach for a more comprehensive response. In fact, we have advocated for a mini-budget to deal with the very many costs that people are struggling with including sky-high rents, childcare costs and insurance costs that are out of control but up until today, the Taoiseach has singularly failed to listen to or respond to that message.Today I asked the Taoiseach about the carbon tax hike and I put it to him that it is neither intelligent nor sensible to add any level of additional cost to people's home expenses at a time of soaring inflation and at a time when we know there is more, and arguably worse, to come. I want to put the question to the Taoiseach again and I want him to confirm for the House and the watching public that this carbon tax hike will not proceed on 1 May. It makes no sense at a time when families are struggling so badly. Every euro in costs, including the additional €22 on a fill of oil or €17 on the annual gas bill, counts. I want the Taoiseach to demonstrate that he can act, as he put it, ""intelligently and sensibly"" and call this tax hike off.I have told the Taoiseach before that attacking me is not an answer.Attacking me is not an answer.My chastity or otherwise is not an answer-----The Taoiseach refuses to answer questions. He refuses to.The Taoiseach is the Head of Government.On our initiative.Then do it.Good for you.Really.Attacking people does not constitute answers."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-03-30	---	1	Ar an Aoine, chonaiceamar an méadú is mó ar easpa dídine ó thosaigh Covid. Tá beagnach 10,000 duine ina gcónaí i dtithíocht éigeandála anois. Is scannal é sin. Is í easpa tithíochta an ghéarchéim is mó sa Stát agus tá sí ag dul in olcas faoi cheannaireacht an Taoisigh. On Friday, we learned that last month saw the single biggest increase in homelessness since Covid began and that there are now almost 10,000 people living in emergency funded accommodation. We have come full circle on this, with the failure of this Government matching that of the previous one. On Monday, three separate reports were published, all showing another massive increase in house prices. In parts of rural Ireland, these increases are more than 20%. The average price of a home across the State now is close to €300,000 and in Dublin it is far more than that. This means that a person needs earnings of between €77,000 and upwards of €100,000 in most of the State to afford a home. That is so far above the earnings of the vast majority of workers as to make home ownership completely and utterly impossible. This locks out a whole generation of home ownership. Of course, the Taoiseach knows that because this morning we saw accounts of a confidential Cabinet memo that states one of the reasons the new auto-enrolment pension scheme is needed is to help pay rent for the increasing number of older people who will now not own a home when they retire and will remain trapped paying extortionate rent. All of this confirms once again that the Government is waving the white flag and telling a whole generation of people they will never own their own home. Young couples starting out in their careers are locked out of home ownership. Single persons, even those on a good income, are locked out home ownership. People in their 30s, 40s or 50s are locked out of home ownership.Why is this happening? Covid-19 construction site closures had an impact and Brexit supply chain disruptions are a factor, but these are not the main reasons. For far too long, Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have over-relied on private investors and developers to meet housing need. God knows, they have dished out tax reliefs, grants and subsidies like confetti. All that has done, however, is push house prices up even more. Never was so much spent to achieve so very little. On top of this, we are now quite rightly supporting families fleeing war in Ukraine and we have an obligation to put a safe roof over their heads at this awful time for their country. We are now dealing with crisis upon crisis. We are dealing with a massive housing emergency and the scale of the Government response needs to match that reality. What is the Taoiseach going to do? It is unconscionable to blindly continue with policies that are so clearly failing. The evidence of that failure is clear to be seen every single day.It is very clear again that the Taoiseach cannot defend his Government’s record on housing. How could he? Some 10,000 homeless is not a slogan. House prices through the roof, where they are up 20% in rural areas, is no slogan. Generations locked out of home ownership and facing extortionate rents is no slogan. There are 35,000 additional homes now required, according to the Government’s own Minister for Housing, Local Government, and Heritage, on the radio this morning to accommodate families from Ukraine. My God, Taoiseach, that is not a slogan either. These are realities. I am inviting the Taoiseach, as the Head of Government to meet those realities head on. The Government’s Housing for All plan is in tatters and it was never fit for purpose to begin with. But now when we deal with a refugee crisis upon a housing crisis, the game is up. I have simply asked what the Government proposes to do to meet those challenges? I am hearing by way of response more of the same and I have to tell the Taoiseach that that is simply not good enough.It is the single biggest failure.Personal attacks are not acceptable, Taoiseach.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-03-29	---	1	I welcome the Taoiseach back. I am glad to see him well after his brush with Covid.I also offer my congratulations to Deputy Ivana Bacik as she takes on her leadership role. Every best wish to her.Workers and families face a cost of living crisis that demands an urgent response. Last week, Energia became the third energy supplier this year to announce a price increase for its customers. The increase will come into effect next month and it will add €427 to the yearly household bill. This is the fourth price hike announced by Energia in the past year and it comes just a week after Bord Gáis announced a massive price increase that will add a €775 additionality to the yearly household bills of its customers. These are frightening numbers and they come after 35 energy price hikes announced last year. Without action, low- and middle-income households face an income squeeze that they will struggle to withstand and, indeed, many are already unable to cope. The Society of St. Vincent de Paul has seen requests for help soar, with households facing an impossible and unacceptable choice between keeping the heating on and doing the weekly food shop.Last week, the Central Bank told an Teachta Pearse Doherty that households would see energy and food costs rise by €1,900 this year. Workers and families cannot bear these costs without very significant financial hardship. They need help. We recognise the causes of this cost of living crisis and we know that households cannot be fully insulated from these costs, but they can and they must be supported as much as possible. The good news is that more can be done. Indeed, the responsibility of the Government is to ensure that more is done. Caithfear níos mó tacaíochta a thabhairt do theaghlaigh. Is féidir níos mó a dhéanamh agus is é cúram an Rialtais cinntiú go ndéantar níos mó. Táimid tar éis insint don Taoiseach cad is féidir a dhéanamh.For five months now, we in Sinn Féin have been calling on the Government and the Minister for Finance to work with the European Commission to remove VAT from household energy bills, and for months that proposal has been dismissed. I welcome the fact that the Taoiseach has now changed position and that he is now, finally, engaging with the Commission to allow for a reduction or a removal in the level of VAT applied to fuels, just as we have been calling for. The conclusions published after the meeting of the European Council last week provide scope to engage with the Commission further on the issue of VAT.What specific ask has the Taoiseach made of the Commission? Has he sought scope for the Government to reduce VAT on domestic energy bills to zero for a period of time, as we have asked? Has the Government applied for a derogation from the current VAT rules? When does the Taoiseach expect this process to be concluded so customers can get the break they need?The Government could take measures now to reduce the cost of home heating oil for hundreds of thousands of households. This month the cost of filling a tank rose to more than €1,600. Many households cannot afford this. We in Sinn Féin have called on the Taoiseach to remove excise duty on home heating oil. Up to now he has ruled this out but given the pressure so many workers and families are under, will he change his position and provide them with additional support by removing excise duty from home heating oil?The Taoiseach has described the problem and accurately signposted that it will be an ongoing problem, so the pressure households are under will remain constant. The Taoiseach must recognise, as I am sure he does, the struggle that means for households and families right across the State. The Taoiseach did not answer a series of very straightforward questions. On the issue of home heating oil, we want the excise duty removed from it.Yes, which is an excise charge on-----Revenue describes it as an excise.I do not care what it is called.I do not care what it is described as. It needs to be removed.It needs to be removed.Will the Taoiseach remove the excise from home heating oil? That is the question. I believe the Government should do that and do it urgently to give relief to those who cannot now fill their tanks and are struggling. I also asked the Taoiseach what specific request was made of the European Commission. Have we sought a derogation in respect of the VAT directives? How long will this process take? What ask has been made? As the Taoiseach is aware, we believe we should look for a zero rate for a defined period of time. Is that what has been sought?To what level?To zero?I am not stupid. I am aware of that. Answer the questions.What?Revenue uses that term.I am avoiding nothing.I used the language the Revenue used.It is not fair-----
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-03-23	---	1	"As the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform will know, the Economic and Social Research Institute, ESRI, published its quarterly report this morning. It makes for very alarming reading. The ESRI says inflation could peak at 8.5% this summer before averaging out at 6.7% for the year as a whole. This, as the Minister knows, is the highest annual rate of inflation since 1984. Inflationary pressures that were already building have escalated further due to Russia's criminal invasion of Ukraine. We are presented with a very serious situation for workers and families as households that struggle to keep their heads above water now face a prolonged cost-of-living crisis. As the Minister knows, everything is going up and even now the very basics are pushed beyond the reach of many ordinary people. Our airwaves are filled with people sharing their stories of how incredibly difficult it is just to make ends meet. People can barely afford to light and heat their homes and we now need to talk about food. The soaring cost of energy and fuel, problems with supply chains and the impact of this criminal war mean the price of groceries is going through the roof. Families now in real terms are stretched to put food on the table and money does not go far when it comes to the weekly shop. People are down the bare essentials and have very little left at the end of the week. They will be very worried and alarmed hearing the news this morning.The ESRI is projecting strong economic growth and a budget surplus this year. That is the good news. The Government therefore has elbowroom within the public finances to intervene and cushion people from the sharpest impact of this crisis. We must ensure workers, families and small businesses come through this crisis in one piece. We must ensure especially that people on low and fixed incomes have enough to live on. The Government cannot stand idly by while people are pushed into poverty. Its members are not observers or commentators on people's hardship. Their job, as the Minister knows, is to respond with speed and urgency to the extraordinary difficulties households now face. However, the Minister's colleague, the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, has said the Government has no plan to intervene with cost-of-living supports until October's budget. He said: ""I can be really clear that we are not considering any further steps."" Does the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform agree with the Minister for Finance's position because October is seven months away and people are trying to stay afloat now? They cannot wait that long for Government to implement measures that will bring the cost of living down.Tá sé geallta ag tuairisc an ESRI go mbeidh an ráta boilscithe i mbliana mar an ceann is airde ó 1984. Ní féidir le hoibrithe agus teaghlaigh dul tríd an ngéarchéim costais mhaireachtála seo. Tá an cumas airgeadais ag an Rialtas déileáil leis seo so caithfidh sé gníomhú anois. I accept the Minister cannot do everything. There is no expectation of that on him or on the Government but they must do more. The Government has to cut the cost of energy and fuel. It will need to go further than that but it needs to start there. I asked the Tánaiste yesterday and now ask the Minister to engage with the EU Commission to remove VAT from energy bills for an initial three-month period and remove excise from home heating oil. These are two initial actions the Government can take to give workers and families the break and the breathing room they desperately need.That is an extraordinary response and a very disappointing one. When the Minister says the Government is at one on these matters I can only assume he is therefore reiterating the position of the Minister for Finance that the Government has no plans to take further measures this side of October. Whereas the State's economic and fiscal forecast needs to be reset this springtime, I tell the Minister households' economic and fiscal realities have taken a battering. It is simply unreal and not accepting of the reality of the soaring inflation crisis to suggest the Government will sit this out for the next number of weeks and months. That is not dealing with the reality. I appeal to him again to move on this. We accept the phenomenon is global. The Minister does not have to keep repeating that. Nobody is placing the origins of this crisis at the Minister's feet - far from it. However, there is an absolute immediate expectation the Government will act now and not wait until October. That is not real. Will the Minister move on the issue of VAT and of removing excise from home heating oil? Will he move on them now and give people some small breathing space?That is not what the Government is being asked to do. The Minister is being disingenuous.No, the Minister is being disingenuous.Until October.I have been asking the Government to deal with this with the Commission for months. I am familiar with the directives."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-03-23	---	2	The British Government is pushing forward with the requirement for EU citizens who are not Irish or British to apply for travel clearance if they want to travel North to South or . This is a disgraceful situation. It undermines the Good Friday Agreement and the common travel area. It creates significant restrictions on freedom across our island. I do not know whether the Minister believes that it is acceptable but I find it wholly unacceptable that, for example, a Polish person who lives and works in Lifford, County Donegal would need papers to travel to Strabane, or from Emyvale to Aughnacloy. The Minister knows this is the reality for many people who live in our Border region.It will be absolutely devastating for the tourism sector. All of us know that when visitors come, from the United States of America, for example, they travel right across the island. Should President Biden pay a visit to Ireland, we could be faced with the bizarre situation whereby he and his party are required to register for permission to travel across the island. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Deputy Coveney, has been in touch with Boris Johnson on this but the Taoiseach needs to intervene strongly with Boris Johnson to call this out. We need to mobilise diplomatically across the world to put a halt to this disgraceful action.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-03-22	---	1	Gabhaim buíochas leis an Ceann Comhairle. Last week, Bord Gáis announced massive price hikes for gas and electricity that will add a further €350 per year to the average gas bill and an €340 to electricity bills. This is the Government credit wiped out before it even arrives. Meanwhile, nothing has been done to cut the cost of home heating oil, which has doubled in 12 months. Workers and families have been hit by a barrage of energy hikes, with more than 30 in the past year. They are already struggling to keep up and have been left absolutely stunned by the scale of the latest increases.Russia's criminal invasion of Ukraine has brought massive disruption and volatility to global energy markets. Everything that can be done should be done and must be done to mitigate the impact and to cut bills for hard-pressed households. The Tánaiste's Fine Gael colleague, the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, has stated that the Government has no plan to intervene with further measures before October's budget. October is seven months away. That is a very long time for households when every single euro counts and when the sky-high bills for rent, mortgages, groceries, childcare and insurance just keep coming. It is endless. Everything is going up and up, and nothing is coming down. People are living under real stress and pressure. Research from the Society of St. Vincent de Paul shows that many people are cutting back on essential heating and electricity use. Families are forgoing other necessities, including food. The head of the charity ALONE has said that many older people now choose between heating or eating. Nobody should have to make a choice like that.We are aware that this is not the end and that there are more energy hikes coming down the tracks. The real impact of Russia's invasion of Ukraine on energy costs will not be felt until the back end of the year. We need to get ahead of this. We need to get on top of this crisis. People expect the Government to respond with a speed and urgency that matches the unprecedented difficulties they now face and to intervene with measures that will work in the context of getting energy bills down, keeping money in people's pockets and giving some breathing space. People need us and they need the Tánaiste to do this now. I understand that the Government cannot do everything, but it can do more. It must go further in order to cushion households from these hikes. Expecting people to wait for seven more months is just a non-runner.Ní féidir le hoibrithe agus teaghlaigh coinneáil suas leis na harduithe fuinnimh seo. Tá sé ráite ag an Aire Airgeadais go mbeidh ar dhaoine fanacht go dtí an buiséad i nDeireadh Fómhair sula ndéanann an Rialtas gníomhú. Tá sé sin do-ghlactha. Caithfidh an Rialtas gníomhú inniu chun na billí fuinnimh a ísliú.I am asking that the Government do two things, and do them urgently. First, I ask that it engage with the European Commission and remove VAT on energy bills for at least three months. Second, I ask that the excise duty on home heating oil be removed. These are two specific measures that will bring the cost of energy and fuel down for struggling households and businesses.Yes, this is global. Yes, it is squeezing those on lower incomes in particular. Yes, there are international factors beyond the Government's control. Yes, yes, yes - but no, the Government should not sit on its hands. The Minister for Finance has said the Government will do nothing additional for the next seven months. I would like the Tánaiste to clarify that that is not the case and that the Government is going to do more. I have given the Tánaiste two concrete proposals on VAT and the excise duty on home heating oil. Both of these things can be done. The proposal in respect of VAT would have to be done in conjunction with the European Commission, but the Tánaiste should bear in mind that as far back as October 2021, and then again this month, the European Commission was very clear that it was providing toolkits to allow member states to intervene in precisely the way I am outlining.I asked the Tánaiste to ensure the removal of VAT and of all excise on home heating oil. As the Tánaiste knows, there is excise on home heating oil. The homework has been done on that on this side of the floor. It is important the Government takes action because we all agree that people are struggling. I am making two clear proposals and I would like an assurance that, contrary to the assertion of the Minister for Finance, the Government will pursue these actions.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-03-09	---	1	Yesterday, I told the Taoiseach that surging fuel prices required that the Government take urgent action to relieve the immense pressure people are under. I appealed to him to bring forward a financial resolution to cut excise duty on petrol and diesel and to remove it entirely from home heating oil. I am very glad to see that good sense has prevailed and the Taoiseach accepts the need to act. Unfortunately, the Taoiseach's approach as set out does not go far enough. It is very important we get this right for people. The proposal I put to the Taoiseach yesterday was to reduce excise duty so that we get the price at the pumps down to €1.75 per litre. The cut proposed by the Taoiseach does not get us anywhere near this point. In fact, hikes overnight erode the benefit of the proposed cut. In many places, prices per litre jumped to as high as €2.20. This means even following the Government's proposed intervention, people will wake up tomorrow and still pay €2 per litre. The Taoiseach acknowledged yesterday that this is not sustainable for people, and it is not. They simply cannot afford €2 per litre today and they will not be able to afford it tomorrow.I am very disappointed to see the proposal does nothing to bring down the outrageous price of home heating oil. As the Taoiseach knows, it has doubled in the past year and last night the price shot up again. People now face prices of between €800 and €900 for a half fill of oil. This is crazy. It is very stressful for workers and families trying to heat their homes. The energy and fuel costs are a disaster for hauliers, school transport companies, taxi drivers and everybody. They expect the Government to act speedily and decisively. Will the Taoiseach recalibrate the intervention to make it fit the realities of the crisis and deliver meaningful relief immediately?I have received hundreds of messages this week from people regarding the real-life impact of these hikes. I want to mention two of them, two women as it happens. Amy, who has young children, told me she now chooses between driving the children to school or having a hot meal ready for them. She describes what she is experiencing as torture. She told me she has spent €120 on diesel in the past eight days alone. She told me her son has a hospital appointment on Monday and she seriously does not think she will be able to afford to take him even though he really needs to go. Lorraine, who is in the process of saving for a mortgage, says it is costing her and her partner an extra €50 a week each for fuel. This is a total of €100 a week in total. She has calculated this at €5,000 a year just to travel for work. She describes her situation as soul destroying.Ní théann an chéim seo sách fada. Ní mór dúinn an praghas ag na pumpaí a fháil síos go €1.75 an lítear, agus ní mór don Rialtas gníomh práinneach a dhéanamh chun costas ola téimh a laghdú. This is the day to get this right. We will work with the Taoiseach to get this right. We cannot have delay or half measures. The financial resolution has to get the cost of petrol and diesel down to €1.75 per litre and keep it there, by further cuts in excise if necessary. We need action on home heating oil.Amy cannot get her child to a hospital visit. I am not asking the Taoiseach to control international events through some miracle. I know he cannot control them. Neither can I. Nobody here can. I am asking the Taoiseach to do every single thing he can, and to do so quickly, to ensure that mothers like Amy, couples like Lorraine and her partner, and workers and small businesses are not totally caught in the grip of the panic that is setting in because people simply cannot make ends meet. I put the proposition to the Taoiseach yesterday that he should cut excise duty on diesel and petrol and get the cost down to approximately €1.75 per litre, although I accept that people will still struggle with that.The prices are growing at such a rate that people expect the Taoiseach to stretch himself and to stretch our European partners and to act in what is a crisis situation. By the way, we have been on to the Taoiseach since last September about talking to the Commission about VAT. He has not done that so he should not cry now. He should tell us how he can get these prices down and keep them down. Half measures will not work.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-03-09	---	2	We as a team have been raising the issue of the cost of living for a year, I think. The Taoiseach acknowledges and we all know the pressure that people are under; therefore, it is incumbent on us to act and to prepare to act. On several occasions this afternoon, the Taoiseach has referred to the price of food. From his commentary, I am reading that he assumes sharp increases in food prices. He mentioned Ukraine as the breadbasket of the world, so the price of bread, for example, will rise. What plans, preparations and mitigations has the Government made for the likely spike in food prices? What preparations have been made at a European level to ensure we have full and necessary flexibility to protect our people?Múinteoir, I will go home and reflect. I will do lines for you, if you like, and bring them in, or detention.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-03-08	---	1	Beannachtaí na féile. A very happy International Women's Day to you and to all.The price of energy and fuel has literally soared over the past year and, of course, prices have risen even more rapidly following the criminal Russian invasion of Ukraine, which, as we know, has resulted in an unprecedented disruption in the global energy market. The cost of petrol at the pumps has increased by 70 cent per litre since January last year. We are now at a point where many people can no longer afford to put fuel in a car to get to work. This is particularly difficult for people who live in remote and rural areas or places where there is no access to frequent public transport.In that same timeframe, since January last year, the price of home heating oil has doubled and households are now being charged more than €700 for a half fill of oil. Families now struggle to keep their homes warm and I know many people are layering with clothes instead. Some are just heating one room or not heating their home at all. Other people, particularly seniors, are staying in bed to stay warm. These fuel cost hikes are not sustainable for any worker, family or small business. As the Taoiseach knows, people are already hammered by extortionate rents, unaffordable house prices and ever-rising insurance and childcare costs. The cost of living was out of control anyway.In fairness, the Government now recognises that what was announced in February does not go far enough to alleviate these pressures, but yet it seems it is not ready to take action this week to reduce the cost of fuel. I put it to the Taoiseach that people cannot wait any longer for relief because they must put fuel in their cars today. They must pay for home heating oil today. Indeed, many wonder if they can afford to do that or if they will have to decide which bill goes unpaid at the end of the week. It is wrong that people must make these kinds of choices and it is not a way to live a decent life.Tá praghas ar bhreosla ag ardú arís agus ní féidir le hoibrithe, le teaghlaigh agus le gnólachtaí beaga coinneáil suas leis. Caithfidh an Rialtas dleacht máil ar pheitril agus ar dhíosal a ghearradh agus é a bhaint óna leithéide. Tabharfaidh sé seo sos atá ag teastáil go géar ó dhaoine.I will set out for the Taoiseach what we believe needs to happen. The Government must cut the price of petrol and diesel through an immediate reduction in excise duty. At the pumps we can get prices down by 25 cent per litre immediately by cutting excise duty. Similarly, the spiralling cost of home heating oil could be cushioned with the immediate and total removal of excise duty. The Dáil will not sit next week so these measures must be introduced now as a matter of urgency, and it can be done. A financial resolution to immediately reduce excise duty on petrol and diesel and to remove excise duty from home heating oil could be passed today. This is the method used to increase or decrease excise duties in the budget, and as we know those changes are typically made overnight.I ask that the Government does this now so that people can see an instant price reduction at the pumps and in their home heating oil bills by midnight.I put it to the Taoiseach that he takes this course of action. It would make a huge difference to workers, families, businesses, hauliers and many providing school transport. They are literally at their wits' end. I am asking that a Financial Resolution be brought to the House tonight or tomorrow night. Sinn Féin will accommodate late sittings or whatever is required but we need to act on this matter now.Nobody is disputing the international context for these soaring prices. I hope nobody is disputing, either, that householders, families, workers, hauliers and those providing school transport are now at their wits' end.Their crisis is now. It is in the immediacy of now. It is a question of how they get to work, get about and heat their home, today, tomorrow and next week. I am well aware that the European Commission is bringing forward proposals and we certainly look forward to seeing them, but we would regard them as being by way of additionality to what the Government in Dublin needs to do now.I have made a very concrete ask of the Taoiseach. I ask again that a financial resolution be brought before the Dáil this week, either tonight or tomorrow night, that will have the effect of reducing excise on petrol and diesel and a 25 cent per litre reduction at the petrol pumps immediately for consumers, and that this resolution would equally have the effect of removing excise entirely on home heating oil to take some of the sting out of that soaring cost. I am asking the Taoiseach to do this now. Speed is of the essence because people are suffering and struggling now.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-03-02	---	1	Last night, we once again witnessed the most harrowing scenes emanating from Ukraine. We have seen the bewildered faces of children and civilian populations fleeing for their safety and lives, spending night after night huddled in air raid shelters in scenes that we never dreamed we would live to witness on our Continent again. Our thoughts are with the people of Ukraine - those who have fled and those who have travelled to Ukraine, including from Ireland. We have heard their harrowing testimonies.Ní féidir le héinne a bhfuil a meas aige nó aici ar an tsaoirse agus ar an bhféinchinneadh ach breathnú le huafás ar ghníomhartha na Rúise. Seasaimid leis an Úcráin agus tugaimid ár dtacaíocht di arís. The ongoing violation of Ukrainian sovereignty and Ukraine's internationally recognised borders is an affront to the principles that we hold dear as members of the international community. I wish to take this opportunity to commend the work of Irish diplomatic staff and NGO personnel who are on the ground in Ukraine and elsewhere in eastern Europe carrying out very important work assisting those caught up in this nightmarish conflict and distributing humanitarian support and aid. This is vital work. I equally commend everyone engaged in collecting aid in Ireland to assist the humanitarian response.The Taoiseach has set out the initial contribution of the Irish Government to the humanitarian effort. We all agree that this is a time when we need to stretch ourselves. Will the Taoiseach set out what else the Government proposes to do and how Ireland might step up our efforts and supports for these humanitarian endeavours?Later this afternoon, I will meet the Ukrainian ambassador to assure her of our continued support and our unwavering commitment to seeing peace in her homeland. I welcome the overwhelming support of the European Parliament yesterday for a resolution condemning Russia's actions. I hope that, in the Dáil this evening, we will equally support the motion before us on a cross-party basis.Our diplomatic response to Russia's actions must be firm, sure-footed and consistent. Our objective is to end the war and we need to play our full part in that. Our military neutrality, our history of conflict resolution and our seat on the UN Security Council mean that we are strongly placed to advance these efforts for a peaceful pathway forwards. Diplomacy must prevail. Every diplomatic avenue must be used to end the war. All diplomatic leverage must be employed.It is clear that the actions of Russia in Ukraine are abhorrent. To that end, I wish to ask about the expulsion of the Russian ambassador to Ireland. Thus far, this is an action that the Government has not taken. It has advanced the case of working in concert with our European partners. I happen to believe that now is the time for our Government and the Taoiseach as Head of Government to take the lead on this issue. Has he raised this matter with his fellow EU leaders? Has he put a proposal to them? Does he agree that it is now time to pursue this course of action?No one, and certainly no Irish person, will underestimate for a second the absolute determination and courage of the Ukrainian people in defending their homeland, families and lives. No one underestimates for a moment the barbarity of Vladimir Putin's regime and the illegality of this invasion of Ukraine. Neither should any of us doubt the absolute necessity to reassert the primacy of international law, rules-based international relationships and, above all else, the need to restore good order, a full withdrawal of Russian troopers and peace such that this war ends.It is in that spirit I invite the Taoiseach as Head of the Irish Government to lead again, to lead together with our partners in Europe and to leverage this crucial diplomatic tool. It is essential as shells rain down on Kyiv and people flee for their lives that we demonstrate in every way to the Russian Federation that Ireland means business and that we will not offer any shelter, any excuse or any cover in any form to them. In that spirit, I again invite the Taoiseach to lead our European partners in this endeavour. As regards keeping diplomatic channels open, and that is a legitimate point the Taoiseach made, there are ways in which that can be achieved such as, for example, the appointment of a chargé d'affaires to ensure that our citizens in Russia or elsewhere are catered for. I invite the Taoiseach not to break ranks with Europe but to lead on this matter.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-03-02	---	2	Last June I raised the issue of the collapse of the HSE dental services across the State and since then the situation has gotten far worse, to the extent that the Irish Dental Association now believes that there are only 750 dentists actively treating medical card holders. This has led to shocking waiting lists across the State and also to the denial of services to countless people. There are more than 10,000 people on orthodontics lists waiting longer than a year and half of those people are waiting longer than three years. That is not acceptable for any patient or for any condition anywhere. Can the Taoiseach explain to me why there has not been an intervention from the Department of Health to deal with this growing crisis? Why are there no serious talks between the Department and the dentists to fix the dental treatment contract and to prioritise preventative oral healthcare? How will the Government ensure that older people, including workers and families on the lowest incomes, can access the good dental treatment they require?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-03-02	---	3	“Ós í an Ghaeilge an teanga náisiúnta is í an phríomhtheanga oifigiúil í”. Is é sin atá ráite i mBunreacht an Stáit seo ach, seachas an díospóireacht inniu, is annamh a tharlaíonn díospóireachtaí lán-Ghaeilge anseo sa Dáil. Níl cead fiú ag Teachtaí Dála leasuithe a mholadh i nGaeilge. Tá cearta níos fearr ag feisirí i bParlaimint na hEorpa anois, toisc an tsárobair a rinne pobal na Gaeilge, Conradh na Gaeilge agus daoine ar nós Liadh Ní Riada a rinne stailc teanga ar son na gceart sin. Is é cearta teanga atá uainn. Faoi dheireadh, tá Acht teanga nua againn sa Stát seo agus tá dul chun cinn mór déanta ansin toisc leasuithe mo chomhghleacaí, an Teachta Ó Snodaigh, ach caithfidh an Rialtas gníomhú de réir a bhriathair.Ó Thuaidh, táimid fós ag fanacht ar Acht teanga. Rinne Sinn Féin gach iarracht é sin a bhaint amach agus lorgaíomar cúnamh ón Rialtas anseo, ach níor tháinig an cúnamh sin. Táimid ag fanacht le gluaiseacht air seo ó Rialtas na Breataine. Caithfidh sé sin tarlú anois.Tá géarchéim teanga sa Ghaeltacht. Tá brú ollmhór ar theaghlaigh Ghaeltachta iompú ar an mBéarla agus an Ghaeltacht a fhágáil. Teastaíonn tithe uathu ina gceantair féin agus seirbhísí Stáit ina dteanga féin. Teastaíonn daonlathas uathu maidir le toghcháin d’Údarás na Gaeltachta. Tá gá le scéim labhairt na Gaeilge a bhunú arís, chun daoine a mhealladh chun páistí a thógáil le Gaeilge sa Ghaeltacht, chun an Ghaeltacht a choimeád beo agus bríomhar sna glúnta amach romhainn.Caithfimid tacú le hiarrachtaí an Ghaeilge a chur chun cinn sa Ghaeltacht agus lasmuigh di freisin. I mo cheantar féin, tá obair na gcapall ar bun ag tuismitheoirí agus pobal scoile i gColáiste Mhuire agus i Scoil Chaitríona sa Chabrach chun an Ghaeilge a spreagadh i measc na hóige agus tréaslaím leo as sin.Tá dea-thoil i leith na Gaeilge le sonrú i measc an phobail ar fad na tíre, ó Bhóthar Seoighe i mBéal Feirste go lár Bhaile Átha Cliath. Teastaíonn an fuinneamh agus an spiorad sin uainn chun an teanga a shlánú. Is ar scáth a chéile a mhaireann na daoine agus is ar scáth an chosmhuintir a mhairfidh an Ghaeilge.I measc cearta teanga, tá cearta oideachais. Ba chóir dúinn borradh a chur le líon na bpáistí atá ag freastal ar naíonraí lán-Ghaeilge agus ar Ghaelscoileanna ach ba chóir freisin cosaint a thabhairt don cheart atá ann leanúint ar aghaidh san oideachas dara leibhéal agus ardleibhéal trí Ghaeilge.Ní cóir go mbeadh an Ghaeilge srianta don scoil nó do lá amháin sa Dáil in aghaidh na bliana. Is í an Ghaeilge an teanga náisiúnta agus tacaíonn Sinn Féin le ról na Gaeilge i ngach gné den saol.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-03-01	---	1	Ar dtús, ba mhaith liom mo dhlúthpháirtíocht, agus dlúthpháirtíocht Shinn Féin, a léiriú le muintir na hÚcráine. Ba mhaith liom ár dtacaíocht a léiriú leo. Ní féidir le éinne a bhfuil meas acu ar an saoirse ach breathnú le huafás ar ghníomhartha na Rúise san Úcráin. Cáinimid na gníomhartha sin go hiomlán.I reiterate on my own behalf and that of my party our total and unwavering solidarity with the people of Ukraine at this deeply distressing and traumatic time for their country. We once again condemn unreservedly the actions of the Russian Government in violating Ukraine's sovereignty and internationally recognised borders, its attacks against Ukrainian people, property and infrastructure, and its initiation of a humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. The invasion of Ukraine and the military assault we have witnessed are a criminal affront to the civilised world and a threat to the peace and security of people everywhere.The Irish people have been appalled at the heartbreaking scenes of civilians being killed, being injured and fleeing their homes for their lives. Communities across our country are now actively working to assist in the humanitarian response. I believe I speak for all Deputies in the Dáil when I say we are united in our condemnation of the actions of the Russian President, Vladimir Putin. Any attempt by Putin or his regime to justify his actions as a response to NATO are without foundation and are merely a means of distraction from his own culpability. It is his military aggression that is bringing death and destruction to Ukraine.The international community has an obligation through diplomacy, support for Ukraine and strong sanctions against the Russian Federation to bring about a peaceful resolution to stop this horrific war and to see all Russian forces leave Ukraine. Ireland must be a voice for peace, justice and freedom in the world.Will the Taoiseach agree with me that Ireland, more than most, understands the impact of occupation and imperialist aggression, that we deeply value the principles of national sovereignty and the right of all people to self-determination, that Ireland also understands the importance and difficulty in finding peace through dialogue and diplomacy and that our status as a neutral state, with no colonial baggage and an independent foreign policy, has allowed us to play a valuable and honourable role in peacekeeping and conflict resolution around the world and in the battle against nuclear proliferation? Now, as a member of the United Nations Security Council, we must do everything we can to end this unjust war and force complete Russian military withdrawal.Will the Taoiseach outline how he intends to intensify sanctions in order to ensure a Russian withdrawal and the right of Ukraine to a peaceful future as a sovereign independent state? I ask him to update the Dáil on the efforts of the Government, as a member of the UN Security Council, to ensure an urgent response to what is a rapidly deteriorating humanitarian crisis in Ukraine.Nobody is under any illusion but that Vladimir Putin and the Russian Federation are the aggressors in this scenario and they have brazenly breached international law. They have launched an all-out offensive against a sovereign people and they have, as the Taoiseach has correctly said, committed war crimes on the watch of the international community. We need to see an intensification of this package of sanctions. Vladimir Putin, and all others who might choose to violate international law and brutalise people, need to understand that the international community can and will put our foot down. I support the Taoiseach’s call for generosity towards those fleeing war and conflict. We must extend the most generous of Irish receptions to those people and families. I want to go back to the economic sanctions and to invite the Taoiseach to set out how we might deepen them, not least in respect of the Russian banking system and the SWIFT system.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-02-23	---	1	Last Wednesday night, the Government voted again to ensure cuckoo funds continue to pay no tax and outbid workers and families for homes they desperately need. Those funds were back in the news at the weekend. The first story was about a Dutch outfit paying €110 million to hoover up 280 family homes in Dublin. The CEO of that outfit said it could own the houses for 50 years and is not selling them. In 50 years, the grandchildren of those struggling to buy a house today will be looking for a home of their own. Another story concerns a couple who cannot buy a house and are living in the house of a family member, which is a common story, even though they had saved a substantial deposit. They are infuriated that the Government continues to support cuckoo funds at the expense of ordinary home buyers.Here is another story. Bartra, the private developer awarded the contract for O'Devaney Gardens, is threatening to sell 500 family homes to a cuckoo fund unless the Government dances to its tune. Bartra was given the valuable public land at O'Devaney Gardens effectively for free.Not content with that sweetheart deal, and a huge subsidy from the public purse, it now wants more. It demands that the Government buy these homes at inflated prices of more than €400,000, or it says it will sell to a fund, which in turn will fleece people with rip-off rents. The developer is effectively trying to blackmail the taxpayer and is using the powerful presence of cuckoo funds as leverage. This is not its first act of bad faith; far from it. There have been huge delays in building these homes. It has challenged planning decisions and mounted a judicial review. It is now brazenly attempting to hold the Taoiseach's Government to ransom.This would not be happening if the Government had provided Dublin City Council with the financial support needed to develop these homes back in 2018. That proposal would have seen the delivery of 800 homes that ordinary people could actually afford to rent or buy. That is what we in Sinn Féin and others called for. Had the Government listened to us, O'Devaney Gardens would be at an advanced stage of construction, ready for families to move in next year. Instead, this deal, which the Taoiseach has championed to the hilt, means that these homes have not been built. When the first homes eventually come on stream, Bartra will slap a price tag of €400,000 on them, which will be way beyond the reach of ordinary workers and families.Cinnteoidh talamh poiblí a dtugtar saor in aisce do na forbróirí chun tithe a thógáil atá róchostasach i gcomhair daoine go leanfaidh géarchéim thithíochta ar aghaidh. Is de bharr pholasaí an Rialtais go bhfuil forbróirí ag bagairt tithe teaghlaigh a dhíol le ciste cuaiche a mbrúnn cíosanna ríchostasacha.The fiasco at O'Devaney Gardens is a mess of the Government's own making. The Government was warned at the time and again that this was a terrible deal for tenants, homeowners and taxpayers. The Government was warned that sidelining the local authority and gifting public land to private developers was a really bad idea. Does the Taoiseach now accept those facts? What is his response to Bartra and its attempts to blackmail the taxpayer? What does he say now to Bartra? Will he now rein in these cuckoo funds by ending the sweetheart tax deals that his Government has afforded to them?It goes way beyond that. The REIT developer friends-----Wow. Brass neck.From your gang.If ever there was a salutary tale and lesson of Fianna Fáil in government, the party of the Galway tent, brown envelopes and a cosy relationship with developers, it is O'Devaney Gardens. Look no further.The reason this has dragged on and on is that its buddies that had a public-private partnership, PPP, arrangement with the State at the time went bust and let the entire community down. I could go on and on, but I do not have the scope to recount the corruption and the corrupted nature of its relationship with the people to whom I have referred. Its plan fails again because it is a myopic and limited view. I put it to the Taoiseach that the funds the Government now mollycoddles and the sweetheart deals it affords them are now coming back to bite it. Bartra has said that unless the State steps in and buys back homes at inflated prices, it is going to offload them to cuckoo funds. Those funds, in turn, will let out these homes and skin people for extortionate rents. I would like to know what the Taoiseach proposes to do about this as the Head of Government.Does the Taoiseach believe the State ought to buy these 500 homes?Furthermore, does the Taoiseach believe that the sweetheart tax arrangements with these funds should continue? That is the Government's policy in the here and now, and it is this policy that is causing so much hardship for an entire generation of people that the Government has locked out of homeownership and who endure extortionate rents. This is happening on the Taoiseach's watch. Those, my friend, are the facts.Yes.Ansbacher, Galway.Pathetic.No.You are pathetic.Pathetic.What is the Taoiseach's response to Bartra?He does not have one.He has no answer.I will when I am in your seat, with pleasure.The Taoiseach has never respected that.I exercised my privilege.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-02-23	---	2	The world is looking on with increasing anxiety at the behaviour of Russia, the mounting prospect of war in Ukraine and the potential for horrific loss of life. The clear breach of international law by Russia cannot stand and sanctions are appropriate and absolutely necessary. There is a serious concern that these sanctions will impact directly on the soaring cost of living here at home. In fact, yesterday the Taoiseach said that in his view, sanctions will result in even further increases in the cost of energy at a time when people are to the pin of their collar paying huge gas, electricity and home heating oil bills. The Taoiseach also stated that there will be not further intervention by Government to tackle the cost of living crisis until the budget and that it will drive on with its carbon tax hike. That is not good enough. The Government must act to protect families and workers from the increased, and increasing, cost of energy. I ask the Taoiseach to confirm what he proposes to do about the further hike in energy prices that he has predicted.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	debate	2022-02-23	---	3	The footprints of collusion that track across Britain's dirty war in Ireland chart a shameful trail of state murder. It was directed and co-ordinated at the highest levels of the British system, in alliance with loyalist death squads, and targeted the nationalist community, Sinn Féin representatives, human rights activists and, indeed, the fledgling peace process itself. The series of reports published by the Police Ombudsman illuminate in horrific detail what has been known for decades. Collusion was no illusion. It was the lived reality for the nationalist community and, for so many, collusion was the route to their murder at the hands of the British state.The Police Ombudsman's report into 27 loyalist murders and attempted murders in south Belfast between 1990 and 1998 is truly shocking. It includes the mass shooting at the Sean Graham bookmakers on the Ormeau Road in February 1992, when five men and boys were shot dead by the UFF. The report shows that British state agents and members of the RUC colluded with the UFF in the murder of these innocent civilians. The depth and callousness of the collusion involved is revealed by the fact that these were agents who were up to their necks in the violent targeting of nationalists. They were on the books and clearly identifiable in multiple murders. In return for their cruel deeds, they were shielded by the British system that directed and orchestrated their actions. As Mark Sykes, a survivor of the Ormeau Road massacre puts it:They were merely a protected species as information about their involvement in killings was not shared with investigating officers and information regarding their involvement was routinely destroyed.Collusion was a structured, organised process that orbited the eventual act of murder. At the centre sat the British state every single time. I refer to the cover-ups, the destruction of evidence, the provision of weapons by the RUC to loyalist groups, the failure by the RUC special branch to alert targets that they were in danger, and the failure to test alibis, to conduct forensic analysis and to protect eyewitnesses. No stone was left unturned to ensure there would be no truth, no accountability and no justice. This report is the latest in a series that has put the travesty of British collusion under a bright spotlight. It follows the Police Ombudsman's damning investigation into Operation Greenwich, which detailed British state collusion in 19 murders and two attempted murders of Irish citizens by the British state. The threads of British injustice in Ireland run deep and wrap around the legacy of conflict. It shows that the British state purposefully targeted members of the nationalist community for murder. Collusion was the method used to keep the hands of the powerful clear and hidden.On Saturday, I stood on the streets of Ballymurphy in west Belfast. Those are the same streets where in 1971 the parachute regiment, the outfit of Bloody Sunday infamy, shot dead ten innocent civilians. The families of the victims showed me the spots where their loved ones were killed. They too have faced decades of cover-up, black propaganda and concerted efforts on the part of the British state to deny and dodge responsibility for the murderous actions of its soldiers in Ballymurphy. For the Ballymurphy and Bloody Sunday families, and for all the loved ones of those whose murders are detailed in the Police Ombudsman's reports, there have been years of hurt, pain and searing anger. There have been years of sleepless nights, chorused by that dull thudding sound that only such injustice can summon. Now, in the face of injustice after injustice, the British Government seeks an amnesty for those who carried out murder on its behalf. Shame on it.Britain can have no hiding place from the deliberate, calculated policy of arming, directing and controlling death squads in Ireland. There is no support for its proposed amnesty here or internationally, and we stand with the families crying out for justice. This Oireachtas must stand as one and foursquare in support of that demand. The Taoiseach has repeated his opposition to the amnesty, as has the Minister this afternoon. However, it is now imperative that we see real effort by the Irish State and the Irish Government to put persistent pressure on the British Government to drop its shameful amnesty legislation and to return to the legacy mechanisms as agreed at Stormont House. It is through these agreed mechanisms that we can best address the legacy of conflict in Ireland and, together, meet the need for truth, justice and, yes, reconciliation too.We can build a better future for everyone who calls Ireland home. I refer to a new Ireland, in which the potential of our people can be realised and where discrimination, prejudice and hate are replaced with hope, friendship and togetherness, and an Ireland where the dark days of the past are never repeated and never relived. How we deal with the legacy of the past, however, is fundamental to building that future. Boris Johnson and his Government cannot ignore their responsibilities. They cannot be allowed to ride roughshod over the opportunity of all our communities to see that future I have referred to made real. We have seen that happen far too many times. Therefore, it is now the responsibility of the Irish Government to ensure that the British Government understands this and understands that this will not happen again.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-02-16	---	1	In February 2015, a 100-year-old woman was left lying on a trolley for 24 hours in Tallaght hospital. The case sparked outrage and anger. At the time the Taoiseach described the incident as “a truly scandalous situation”. We were told this should not have happened and the cry from the Government was one of never again. In November of that same year, a 91-year-old man spent 30 hours on a hospital trolley. The Taoiseach's response was that the then Taoiseach and the Minister for Health must take responsibility for the ongoing crisis.Fast forward six years to today, on his watch as Taoiseach, figures show that in January alone, nearly 1,100 patients aged 75 years and over were lying on trolleys for 24 hours and more. The Taoiseach was right in 2015 when he said that one elderly patient lying on a trolley was scandalous. That 1,100 elderly patients were left waiting on a trolley in a single month is 1,100 scandals, one after the other. Numbers are very clinical. Numbers are not personal but every one of these 1,100 is a person, somebody’s grandfather, grandmother, mother, father, brother or sister; somebody's loved one.This crisis has not fallen out of the sky. The Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation, INMO, has been ringing the alarm bell at the Government for weeks and weeks. It says we face an extremely dangerous situation and that in some cases it is the worst the organisation has ever seen. Yet the Minister for Health sits on his hands and the HSE fails to act. On 25 January, University Hospital Limerick registered a record number of people on trolleys for a hospital for a 24-hour period. That same day, trolley figures across the State hit a two-year high. Yesterday, in the Taoiseach's own neck of the woods, Cork University Hospital registered its highest number of patients recorded on trolleys since the trolley count began.The big question that arises this morning is what exactly is the Minister for Health doing. What exactly is the HSE doing? The Taoiseach tells us we have to pay big bucks to get big results. The Minister for Health, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, is paid €225,000, Paul Reid of the HSE is paid €412,000 and Robert Watt who is the Secretary General of the Department is paid €298,000. I believe that when you pay people that kind of money you expect big results. You expect that the job is done. Yet promise after promise has been made but we still have a crisis in GP provision, we do not have enough inpatient beds or enough community recovery beds and the scandal of trolleys continues. Despite paying these three men almost €1 million between them, the root causes of hospital overcrowding persist.Tá géarchéim tagtha arís leis an bplódú inár n-ospidéil. Ní rogha é easpa gnímh leanúnach ón Rialtas. Caithfidh an tAire cruinniú éigeandála de thascfhórsa na Roinne a eagrú.Do the Taoiseach and the Minister for Health accept responsibility for the crisis in our hospitals? How is it that in the midst of this extraordinary crisis the emergency department task force has not yet met? I am asking that the Taoiseach instruct the Minister to ensure that the task force meets as a matter of absolute urgency.In those circumstances the Taoiseach and his Government are failing miserably in their task. I do not accept his excuse that this is a consequence of Covid. For example, he said he would eliminate waiting lists when he was Minister for Health 20 years ago. We now have 900,000 people waiting on lists. In 2015, the Tánaiste, the Taoiseach's partner in government and a former Minister for Health, said people would be waiting no longer than 18 months to see a consultant. Last month 155,000 people were waiting longer than 18 months. I could go on and on.The truth is the failure lies with a lack of capacity; that is for sure. We lack beds but also resources, theatre capacity and diagnostics. The list is very long. Arguably, however, the bigger failure is a failure to reform. I was very alarmed to hear, as recently as this morning at the health committee, that it seems the Secretary General of the Department of Health has not signed up for Sláintecare and has not signed up for the type of reform we need.I will put it to the Taoiseach again. Does he accept responsibility for this situation? How is it that the emergency department task force has not met? I see the Minister has joined us. Can we have an explanation for that, given the chronic situation?Taoiseach, answer the question.And people on trolleys.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-02-16	---	2	The parents and staff of Scoil Naomh Cholmcille in County Louth are at the gates of the Dáil today. They are protesting the failure of the Government to provide the school with an adequate number of special needs assistants, SNAs, for children with autism spectrum disorder. They have just one SNA to share between 12 kids. It is by no means a unique situation. SNA provision is in crisis across the State. Indeed, the assessment process used to allocate resources is clearly not fit for purpose. Scoil Naomh Cholmcille has repeatedly made requests for extra SNAs which have been denied by the Department. The school has been told to reprioritise its resources. The fact is the school does not have enough resources. This is by no means a unique situation. I have come across the same issue in my own constituency. Will the Taoiseach ensure that the Minister for Education, Deputy Foley, intervenes for this school and others?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-02-15	---	1	"Last week, people hoped the Government would finally respond to the unbearable cost of living with measures that would make a difference. This did not happen because the Government simply does not get it. Tá an pacáiste costais mhaireachtála a d’fhógair an Taoiseach an tseachtain seo caite i bhfad ró-bheag, i bhfad ró-dhéanach. Is ar éigean go bhféadfadh sé difríocht a dhéanamh.At the weekend, I asked people to share their cost of living stories with me. In a matter of hours, I received almost 1,000 replies. These are stories of extortionate rent, of cold homes, of struggling to put food on the table and fuel in the car, and of unaffordable insurance and childcare. These are stories of hardship and worry, which are pushing families to the edge. I will share some of these stories with the Taoiseach. Kieran wrote to me stating:We have respectable jobs. [but] Our apartment is an ice box- we have to choose between food and my daughter's medicine or heat. Our daughter...wear[s] 2 pairs of PJ's [pyjamas] during the day and 2 at night while covered in 2 [or] 3 blankets to keep warm. We can't afford childcare so my parents babysit. It's impossible to get on the housing market. I feel guilty every night.Barbara said:We have nothing left. I can't buy the same amount of food I used to buy. I buy the cheapest meat. I just hope that nothing breaks down like my car or...[my] washing machine.Amy told me:We work full time. We're struggling to put oil in our tank and diesel in [the] car. [We] pay insurance that is colossal, feed ourselves and keep things going. There’s only ... two of us [but] I can't imagine what it would cost if we had kids.Janice told us:€950 in rent for [a] one bedroom ... spending €40-50 a week [on] petrol. €2000 [on] insurance. Bills haven't arrived yet for 2022 but I'm really scared.Robert told me:I'm getting electricity bills at 240-260 euro and rent of €1,100 for a damp 1-bed apartment. Something needs to be done.""Eamonn said:After paying utility bills, it is then a toss-up between food and rent. I had to request ... help from the ...Vincent De Paul to get some food. I'm feeling so lost.Caoimhe says:I’m a 26-year-old teacher. This year I have found it so tough...[just] to keep myself afloat. My cost of living is nearly one whole pay check. My question to ... government is when will it change? I’m working to survive not [to] live.Finally, Anna said:My ESB bill was near[ly] €400. The Government credit isn't worth the paper it's printed on. What about the cost of my petrol? My rent? This government has left me behind.These stories are just a glimpse of what people face. The package announced last week offered only the bare minimum and it will not make a dent for people. It is very clear that the Government needs to do much more but yesterday, the Taoiseach said there would not be any further interventions until the next budget. He shows no urgency but instead dithers and delays. The Taoiseach cannot seriously suggest that those who are struggling to pay their bills today must wait until October when the Government might possibly intervene. The house is on fire now. Workers and families cannot wait seven months for a fire brigade that might never come.I shared stories with the Taoiseach, real lived experiences in the here and now. People are making choices between heat and food. People feel lost and frightened. It is not an exaggeration to say that families are staring into the abyss. That is the truth. You cannot spin the truth of people's lives. The Government has not cushioned these people or their families. The budget did not do it and the package announced last week did not do it. They are the facts. I hope the Taoiseach will show a willingness to listen to that reality.What I am asking for and what these families need are initiatives that take costs down. I have shared with the Taoiseach the fact that many people are shelling out huge sums of money to live in small and damp accommodation - kips, quite frankly, if I can use that term. I have asked the Taoiseach time and again to intervene to bring the cost of rent and childcare down. We have also asked him to ditch the notion of a carbon tax hike in May. He refuses to do those things. He cannot spin the truth of people's lives. People cannot wait until October for relief and real help. I am asking the Taoiseach again to hear these stories, respond and act now, not to drive inflation but to take costs down.The Taoiseach should do something about it."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-02-09	---	1	Two reports that came out today are damning of the Government’s housing policy. The latest rental report from  shows that rip-off rents were up another staggering 10% in the final three months of last year. New figures also reveal that cuckoo funds, courtesy of sweetheart tax deals provided by the Government, massively outbid ordinary house buyers for family homes and then rent them back to those people at extortionate rates.On the Taoiseach's watch, affordability has gone out the window. These rack rents mean that people have no breathing room to save for a deposit. Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have made homeownership a pipe dream for an entire generation and a nightmare for those desperately seeking to put a roof over their heads.In October's budget, the Taoiseach did nothing for renters - zero, zilch,  - and this has to change fast. The cost-of-living measures the Taoiseach says he will introduce must include cutting rents and banning rent increases for three years. Ripped-off renters need relief now.The average rent in the last three months of 2021 was a whopping €1,524, and it was more than €2,000 in Dublin. Let us take a second for that to sink in. There are double-digit increases in 20 counties, up by 20% or more in every county in Connacht, so clearly the rent cap of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, is a failure.In December, the Taoiseach said the role of cuckoo funds in wrecking the housing market was being exaggerated. However, his claim was simply untrue, and it does not tally with the facts that 4,900 family homes were bulk-purchased by these very funds last year and that they outbid ordinary homebuyers by up to 32%. It is past time that the Government took action on these funds. They are a key driver in pushing rents up to record levels. People are forced to pay rip-off rents before they get to pay their energy bills, put food on the table or meet the cost of childcare. Many renters are left with literally nothing at the end of the month, so is it any wonder that Generation Rent feels battered, bruised, exhausted and sold out?The report shows the Government is failing on supply. The number of homes available to rent is at its lowest in 15 years and, therefore, we should not be surprised that landlords get away with charging big money, sometimes to live in places where your feet could literally touch your fridge while you are lying in your bed. This is a social disaster. It is unfolding on the Government's watch. Rip-off rents rob a generation of a decent life and the ability to build their future. This cannot continue. We need action now. Renters do not have the luxury of waiting on the never–never for the Government to deliver on supply. Is tubaiste sóisialta iad na cíosanna atá as smacht. Tá glúin iomlán ann atá níos measa as ná riamh, agus tá sé ag dul in olcas. Caithfidh an Rialtas cíosanna a ghearradh agus cosc a chur ar arduithe ar feadh trí bliana.I have been asking Taoiseach until blue in the face to cut rents by means of a tax credit, putting €1,500 back into renters' pockets, and to ban rent increases for three years. He could have done this at budget time but chose not to. I now urge him to do these very things as part of the cost-of-living package he promised. He should take this opportunity to finally make a difference for the renters of Ireland.The Taoiseach does not need to do any kind of deep dive just to come across these figures. A rent of €1,500 or €2,000 per month is simply unaffordable. It seems that he does not actually understand what is happening. He seems to be suggesting the funds build the houses in question; they do not.They acquire them, and they do so by outbidding ordinary families and workers who simply want to purchase a home and put a roof over their heads. That is what is happening. Does the Taoiseach know what his policy is doing? It is making a bad situation worse. It is demonstrating that the wrong kind of supply can actually make the situation worse.The average renters find themselves in a nightmare of the Government's construction. They are being fleeced for high rent by the funds that have sweetheart and favourable arrangements with the Government, and they are unable to accumulate a deposit and advance in their lives.It is outrageous. It strikes me that the Taoiseach is happy to come in and recite big figures, but never actually get to the root of the issue or deal with the day-to-day reality that people cannot make their rent. I put it to the Taoiseach again that, as part of the Government's cost of living package, he should cut rents by means of a tax credit and, for God's sake, put a ban on runaway rent increases for three years. I ask the Taoiseach to do those things for the renters of this country.It does.Apartments-----Apartments are homes.It is about affordable supply and the right supply.Hear, hear.Absolutely.Hear, hear.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-02-09	---	2	A survey conducted by SIPTU has found that 41% of childcare professionals are actively seeking a job in another sector. It also found that childcare managers have indicated major difficulties in the recruitment of staff. This should not come as a shock to the Government because early years professionals are very poorly paid and their conditions are in need of massive improvement. Indeed, the vast majority of childcare workers struggle to make ends meet. They regularly do work for which they are not paid and, astonishingly, only 10% have paid maternity leave. Their skill, professionalism, expertise and the contribution they make to the forming and education of young children are invaluable. Their pay and conditions have to be addressed as a matter of urgency. Staffing has gone beyond the crisis point in the sector. Fair pay scales and a career path for early years professionals are urgently needed. When will this happen?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-02-08	---	1	. For more than a year, households have been hammered by a cost-of-living crisis that is out of control. Workers and families do all they can to keep up with sky-high bills and runaway price increases, but people still cannot catch a break or catch a breath. They are crucified by the extortionate costs of housing, energy, fuel, groceries and insurance and everything going up and nothing coming down. Last night, a Minister of State offered people advice on dealing with this cost-of-living crisis. His big idea was for people to stop complaining and to shop around. Those were callous and indifferent remarks from a Minister of State who is paid €140,000. The Minister of State, Deputy Fleming, has form in blocking legislation that would force big insurance companies to stop fleecing their customers. His words reflect the attitude of a Government that is utterly out of touch with the struggles of ordinary people.Many households are deciding whether it is best to pay their massive gas bills or to put food on their tables. It took the Taoiseach’s Government a year to wake up to this crisis. For months, we have asked that VAT be removed from energy bills, but the Government did nothing. No work was done with the European Commission. There was no effort at all. The Government has now spent another four months talking about possible actions. Indeed, in the time it has taken the Government to give people a one-off payment of €100, it has managed to give one top civil servant two pay hikes worth €6,000. There was no dithering or delay there; it was done with the snap of your fingers. When it comes to workers and families, however, the response from the Government is slack. There is no urgency and no determination to get the job done.Many things can be done to tackle this cost-of-living crisis. Sinn Féin has proposed these measures: cutting rents, banning rent increases, cutting childcare costs and expanding eligibility for the fuel allowance payment. We have also called on the Government to scrap its planned carbon tax hike. This hike will increase gas bills and push home heating oil costs up substantially at a time when people are struggling.Carbon tax hikes add to the cost of everything, particularly food, due to increased transport costs. Farmers have been telling the Government this for a long time but it has not listened. Is ualach trom é an ghéarchéim costais mhaireachtála. Tá daoine faoi bhrú ollmhór ag íoc billí fuinnimh móra. Ba cheart don Rialtas fáil réidh leis na harduithe cánach carbóin atá molta. Ní dhéanfaidh sé ach an saol níos deacra.Hiking carbon taxes is the wrong call at the wrong time. The Government's €100 credit is far too little for far too many families. March is very far away for people who cannot afford their energy bills today. That payment must be increased and delivered quickly. I call on the Taoiseach to scrap the carbon tax hike and set out how he will support struggling families in a meaningful way. Workers and families now need a bailout. We need a package of measures for those on low and middle incomes.What people who are living this struggle have had is delay, dithering and lack of clarity from the Government bar the one Minister of State who was very clear and told people to stop complaining and shop around. I take it from the Taoiseach that that is not the official advice from the Government. The Government should stop dithering and should intervene in a way that is proportionate to the real struggles facing people. At the time of the budget, the Government fell short on social welfare adult payments and in the fuel allowance, the season itself and extending eligibility for it. The Government has fallen short for months while Sinn Féin has called on it for a discretionary fund and to package and tailor initiatives, particularly for low- and middle-income families. What do we get? , dither and delay. That is simply not good enough now.As an important first action and signal, albeit one that would not be the be-all and end-all, I want the Taoiseach to state categorically that the Government will not proceed with the carbon tax hike in May at a time when people are struggling to afford a fill of home oil. Will he make that clear, please?People cannot pay their bills today, this week or this month.The Taoiseach is comparing a novel to a human rights report.The Taoiseach might read the Amnesty International report.Read the report.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-02-02	---	1	"Ava Cahill is 11. She is from Tallaght in Dublin and she has spina bifida. She has been waiting for more than a year and a half for corrective surgery. As a result of this wait, Ava lives in considerable and daily pain because her feet have turned in on themselves and her condition is worsening. Her mother says that it is increasingly difficult for Ava to hold her splint in place. She needs this to keep her feet straight. Ava says it is increasingly difficult for her to do everyday things. Her feet keep getting caught in her pants when she tries to dress herself and she does not want anyone to see her feet. Ava, like every child, simply wants to do the things that her friends do. She so badly needs this operation. She said, ""It would make my feet straight and I can tell everybody that my feet are normal."" Ava's story is not unique. Some 90,000 children are on some form of waiting list. Hundreds of children wait for years for urgent, life-changing orthopaedic surgery for conditions like spina bifida and scoliosis. Many children with spina bifida wait for between one and four years.Úna Keightley of the Spina Bifida Paediatric Advocacy Group outlined what this means for these children, stating, ""They are having open sores and wounds. They are having skin breakdown and infection. There is extreme mental distress to their families and to the children themselves and some of them have actually become inoperable,"" because they have waited for so long. They are inoperable, having waited for a procedure to which they are entitled, but now it is too late for them. Orthopaedic consultant Dr. Connor Green told the Joint Committee on Health in November that children's potential is being destroyed, physically and psychologically, because of all of this. Due to the wait, children who once walked independently are now in wheelchairs. This is a failure of vulnerable children.Time is of the essence. The longer these children wait for surgical intervention, the more complex the procedures they eventually need. The wait is ruining their chance and right to a normal life, free of pain. It is not good enough for them to be simply let be. Ní mór don Rialtas gníomh a dhéanamh i gcomhair na bpáistí atá ag fanacht ar obráidí spina bifida agus scoliosis. Ciallaíonn sé sin páistí a bhaint as na liostaí feithimh. Chinnteodh infheistíocht de €5 milliún go bhfaigheadh na páistí seo na hobráidí atá ag teastáil go géar uathu.The Government could act today to end the agonising wait for these children, to get them off the waiting lists and ensure that they have the life-changing procedures they desperately need. For a relatively modest investment of €5 million, the additional capacity necessary could be delivered to clear these lists. This funding request has been with the Government and Minister for Health for two years. I want to know why this money has not been allocated. It is the best €5 million the Government could spend. It would make a huge difference to children's lives, free them from serious pain, improve their long-term outcomes, and relieve their families of the most immense stress and worry. Children should not have to display their agony, shed their tears on national television, or protest outside the Dáil to get the healthcare they need and which they are fully entitled to.The Taoiseach should not play the Covid card. As far back as 2014, Temple Street hospital issued a damning report, setting out the failures in service for children with spina bifida. To this day, these children are still failed. I am afraid that it is an issue of funding. A request for €5 million of funding has been with the Minister----------for two years for Cappagh hospital.Current funding of €5 million is needed. The Government has known about this for many years. It is a matter of funding. We can deal with this quite simply. I want a commitment from the Taoiseach that the moneys required to give these children the procedures they need will be released as a matter of urgency. Deputy Cullinane and I have met with CHI. By all means, the Taoiseach should meet with whoever he wishes, but he does not need a long round of meetings to understand what has happened here. Would it surprise the Taoiseach to hear that operating theatres are idle in Cappagh? We have the surgeons and the capacity. They need funding. It is €5 million. The Minister, Deputy Donnelly, knows about it. I ask the Taoiseach to make it happen and ensure this funding is released urgently.Well then, release it.Pardon me?Why has it not what?The Taoiseach needs to tell them again-----They have not done it.Tell them that.Does he want me to go and tell them?Does he want me to do his job?I am happy to. I will do your job any day.Well then, do not ask me questions.I answer questions, you see."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-02-02	---	2	"I also extend my sympathies with the family of the late Noel Treacy.A decade ago, Fine Gael and the Labour Party removed the right to retire on a State pension at 65 years. Over the last two years, the Government has plotted and planned to ratchet the pension age up to 66, 67 and 68 years. We in Sinn Féin remain absolutely committed to people's right to retire if they so wish at the age of 65 on a pension.The report of the Oireachtas joint committee on social protection rejected the Government's plans to ratchet up the pension age. Will the Taoiseach give a clear commitment that the pension age will not rise? Furthermore, will he give a commitment that the Government will act to restore the retirement age of 65 years of age? He said he has an open mind. I ask that he have an open mind on this issue because it is a matter of fairness and fair play for workers.Does the Taoiseach want me to answer that?Is that a ""Yes"" or a ""No""?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-02-01	---	1	The Government's decision that students will not have choice this year for their leaving certificate is appalling. It is a massive mistake not to allow a hybrid or blended model and not to give a choice to students between traditional exams and calculated grades. Furthermore, the way in which this decision was communicated was equally awful. It was cynically leaked to the media late last night. Stressed-out students who had waited for months for the Government to make a decision found out through social media or from a WhatsApp message that the die had been cast. An incredible level of disrespect has been shown to these young people. Their voices have been ignored and set aside. The Government has failed fundamentally to understand the level of disruption they have been subjected to. Fairness is the victim in all of this.Students have been coherently calling for choice and for a blended approach because it makes sense and because it is fair. This year's leaving certificate students have had their entire senior cycle, both fifth year and sixth year, disrupted by Covid-19. They have had to overcome massive academic challenges and that is before we even consider the incredible pressure on their mental health. Students faced two months of full closures last year and had out-of-class education, which is not comparable to in-classroom learning. Many struggled with a lack of devices and WiFi connection issues. On top of all that, they had the stress of living through a global pandemic.They were high levels of absences for students and teachers because of self-isolation and infection, which has had a massive impact. To this day, it is having an impact in the classroom. The Irish Second–Level Students Union, ISSU, surveyed more than 40,000 students and almost half of them reported that they had missed between one and three classes per day on average. That disruption continues. There have been huge problems with substitute teacher cover. In some schools, mock exams have been pushed back because the students are far behind.None of this should be swept under the carpet. Students want choice. That is what happened last year. A huge number of students, when given the choice, chose to sit the traditional exam but they also had the calculated grades. Covid has affected different schools, different students and different teachers in different subjects in very different ways. Additional options within a paper do not fairly compensate for all of that. It is obvious that what we need here is a choice that affords students the option of a written exam or calculated grades. None of this is plain sailing. There are challenges but I do not accept that any of them are insurmountable. Is cinneadh uafásach é leanúint ar aghaidh le hardteistiméireacht traidisiúnta. Cuireadh isteach go mór ar mhic léinn le dhá bhliain anuas. Teastaíonn rogha uathu. Teastaíonn ardteistiméireacht hibrid uathu. The Government has made the wrong call and I am asking the Taoiseach - in fact, I am appealing to him - on behalf of every leaving certificate student to do the fair thing, which is to give students choice.What students have asked for and a point on which they have been consistent was choice, which meant a choice between a traditional exam in whatever form and calculated grades. That was deemed appropriate and necessary last year because of the Covid disruption and the truth is that this year's leaving certificate students have been similarly disrupted. There has been significant disruption to the learning of fifth-year and sixth-year students.If the Taoiseach listened to what students were telling him, he would be left in no doubt that when they asked the Minister for choice, that is what they meant. Yes, they wanted clarity. They wanted a clear expression from Government that they had been heard and that fairness would guide the decision of Government. Nothing the Taoiseach has said to me explains away the fact that he has failed to give that choice to our students.I reiterate that students have been through an incredible disruption. This has had an effect, as the Taoiseach conceded, on their learning.It has also had a deep effect on so many of them personally. They have asked the Government to simply be as fair with them this year as it was with students last year. I appeal to the Taoiseach again. This is the wrong decision and I invite the Taoiseach and the Minister to reverse it in the interests of those students.There are options.Deputy Ó Laoghaire has written to the Minister.Deputy Ó Laoghaire is our spokesperson on education.There are assessment tools that are used in the North.But the Taoiseach is not the Minister for Education.The Minister for Education has the options.That is correct.It is done elsewhere.Assessment tools.They are given a choice.The Taoiseach is out of line with fairness.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-01-26	---	1	Yesterday, I raised with the Taoiseach the out-of-control cost of living and the never-ending price hikes that workers and families are forced to endure. I must say he came up very short in terms of a complete Government plan in respect of energy cost. It seems he is either unable or unwilling to grasp the scale of the crisis that hard-pressed households deal with every day. They know - even if the Taoiseach does not - a €100 credit will barely make a dent in their colossal energy bills.I want to move on and ask the Taoiseach about another area that is driving the cost-of-living crisis. Rip-off rents continue to soar on his watch in Government. In fact, since Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael came together in 2016, rents have jumped by a colossal 46%. Last year alone rents increased by over 8%. Today the average rent is now over €1,300 a month and in Dublin the average is a staggering €1,916 per month, almost €2,000. This is extortionate. This has real consequences on people's lives. More than one third of young people in their mid to late 20s live at home with their parents. Homeownership rates are collapsing among those aged between 25 and 54, and is it any wonder? How on earth could anybody save the money for a deposit while forking out €2,000 a month to a landlord? That is before they deal with the sky-high cost of energy, fuel, groceries and, of course, childcare. It is little wonder that we hear stories from renters having to choose between putting food on the table or paying their electricity bill.Generation rent, as they are called, is the generation cast aside by bad Government policies that continue to favour big landlords and institutional investors over the interests of those in housing need. The Taoiseach's approach is failing. His rent caps do not work for rent pressure zones and in counties where they do not apply, renters are left struggling with astronomical rises. Meanwhile, the Minister, Deputy Darragh O’Brien, delivered just 5% of the affordable rental homes promised for 2021. Just 25 affordable rental homes were delivered in a whole year. That is a serious failure when renters are being crucified and are crying out for quality accommodation with fair rents that will not break the bank.The Government has to get real now. It is as simple as that. It needs to turn away from policies that have not worked and embrace those that will. Tá cíosanna as smacht ag cabhrú leis an ngéarchéim costais mhaireachtála a spreagadh. Tá teipthe ar chur chuige an Rialtais. Tá sé thar am €1,500 a chur ar ais i bpócaí cíosóirí tríd aisíoc cánach agus cosc a chur ar arduithe cíosa ar feadh trí bliana. Renters need a break and they need it now. What the Government needs to do is to put money back in renters’ pockets by means of a tax rebate and it needs to place a ban on rent increases for three years. It needs to do this with urgency because renters cannot wait any longer for the Government to act. Let us be clear: unless the Government takes these actions, we will see more people pushed into homelessness, more young and not so young people moving back home to live with their parents and home homeownership will remain a pipe dream for an entire generation.Greedy developers. That is how it collapsed eventually.The Government has failed in terms of supply and affordability. Those are the facts. I will help the Taoiseach to try to absorb the reality. This image shows a storage room. This accommodation would set you back just €300 a month. That is probably considered good value in the Taoiseach's housing market. This image shows a converted hallway in Dublin. This would knock you back €910 a month. That is probably a snitch in the Taoiseach's mind. What about this image? It is from Cork. In this particular rental accommodation, you could touch your fridge if you stretched your feet out of your bed. That is the reality for generation rent. Do not dare talk to me about false narratives or claim that you understand the crisis. You clearly do not. While the Taoiseach is over there scratching his head, I have told him two things he can do that will work. He should put money back into renters' pockets by way of a tax rebate and institute a three-year freeze on rents. If he does that, we and, more importantly, generation rent and renters might believe that he finally gets it.Did you live like those living in the accommodations I have described?Stop that.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-01-26	---	2	The Taoiseach correctly described the scandal of inappropriate prescribing of medication to young mental health service users in County Kerry as deeply shocking. The wider public, in particular those availing of mental health services or whose children or young people are availing of mental health services, need an assurance at this time that what happened in Kerry is not happening anywhere else to anyone else. The Taoiseach has described what happened as a systemic collapse of clinical governance and management of the service. Will he set out what measures are in place to prevent this from happening in other mental health services? Will the Government act with urgency to resource child and adolescent mental health services, CAMHS, properly and to the required levels?The help-to-buy scheme is inflationary.How many?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-01-25	---	1	This time two years ago, we were in the midst of a general election. The Taoiseach will recall the election was brought about by the crisis in health. It was an election in which workers and families, frustrated and fed up with repeated failures of successive Governments in housing and healthcare, voted for change in huge numbers. Now, two years on and in the cold light of day, people see that these crises in housing and health have only gotten worse. We have record rents, soaring house prices and 1 million people on treatment waiting lists, and if that was not enough, households struggle to keep up with the cost of living that is out of control.People are under huge pressure as they are hammered by non-stop price hikes in every area. The living standard of workers and families is squeezed by the highest rate of inflation in 20 years and a lack of Government action. For far too many people, being ourselves again means the stress and struggle of trying to keep up with soaring costs while wages stay the same. The yearly cost of putting food on the table is to go up by nearly €800. The cost of running a car is to go up by an average of €500. Record rents are up by 8.1%. Families are paying the equivalent of a second mortgage in childcare costs. The cost of lighting and heating a home is up a massive 53%. It is never ending. All of this adds up to a cost of living that is unbearable. The Government must urgently deliver a plan that gets these costs down, but this urgency is sorely absent.People have been hit with 35 energy price hikes in the past year and the Government has been far too slow to react. The €100 credit for energy bills comes very late. The Government did not deal with this in the budget. It refused to sit on this matter in December and now the €100 credit will come into force only in March or April. Costs are now so far out of control that this will not be a game changer for families paying thousands just to light and heat their homes. It should be borne in mind that families pay these off-the-wall bills today and the benefit of the €100 will likely be cancelled out as costs increase further. Workers and families stretch themselves to make it to the end of the week and they deserve better than this slack response from Government. They want they need real action.Tá an costas maireachtála imithe ó smacht. Tá daoine cráite mar gheall ar an ardú mór ar phraghsanna atá imithe ó smacht. Tá sé thar am ag an Rialtas gníomh a dhéanamh agus faoiseamh a thabhairt do dhaoine. Does the Taoiseach accept that we need great urgency in dealing with this cost-of-living crisis?Does the Taoiseach accept that there needs to be a step change in the Government's approach? Has he engaged with the Commission for Regulation of Utilities on this worsening crisis? Has he directed the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, to get the heads of energy companies around the table to devise solutions for hard-pressed customers? Without Government action, things will get worse for families that are just keeping their heads above water. This is a vicious cycle. It is never-ending. It is no way for our people to live or build a future. The Taoiseach's lack of urgency cannot continue. It is now time for Government to do its job and protect workers and families from being fleeced.The truth is that no step change has been effected by the Taoiseach's Government.What we have seen is more of the same. The proof of that is that house prices are up 14% and rents are up 8%. The truth is that the Government has continued with the same approach. Rather hearing an answer from the Taoiseach, he reached for excuses. I am well aware of the international context and of the inflationary pressures. By the way, the Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland has made it clear that this is not a momentary phenomenon. This is going to be with us for the next year. I want the Taoiseach to listen to people. I want him to listen to the experiences of families who are telling us and him that they are struggling to keep the lights on and to keep up with their bills and other costs. I want him to make clear what his Government proposes to do about that. They are introducing the €100 relief for energy costs, but that comes very late and, in truth, it will not be sufficient. I want to know what the Taoiseach will do in addition. I have suggested that he and the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications, Deputy Eamon Ryan, should act to ensure that there are solutions for customers and families struggling today.Energy costs.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	53	Dublin Central	question	2022-01-19	---	1	Ashling Murphy was not the first woman to die in a random violent attack as she went about her business in broad daylight on the banks of the Grand Canal. Others have met violent deaths going to work, coming home, in daylight and in dark. The outpouring of grief and anger across the land is a powerful expression of solidarity with the Murphy family who now face the unimaginable heartbreak of coming to terms with life without Ashling. The streams of stories, personal experiences and traumatic narratives that flood our airwaves are stark testimony that male violence against women, harassment of women and degradation of women are endemic, pervasive and ever-present in Irish life. We now stand at a crossroads and there is a choice to be made. We must choose action - united, persistent action, to end the violence, the threat of violence, the fear of violence that blights the lives of women and girls. We must make that choice and we must mean it.The roots of sexism and misogyny run deep. The Ireland of religious dogma, that defined women as men's property, that excluded women from the world of work, that relegated us as objects and confined us to domestic chores, that confined and exploited the poor and vulnerable in laundries and mother and baby homes and that stole babies from the arms of their mothers, that Ireland defined and disfigured the lives of generations of women; our grandmothers, our mothers. Much has changed. The face of misogyny has changed but it has not gone away. Today's Ireland, our place, our daughters' Ireland, is ugly and dangerous still, whether it is the unsolicited sexual photos, the online stalking and abuse and harassment in shops, in nightclubs, on the bus, on bicycles, at work or at college. It is the intimidation of lewd commentary and catcalling. It is the never-ending mansplaining. It is the gaslighting and the coercive control. It is rape.All of this and more is the circuitry of misogyny, a culture that enables violence against women and then looks the other way. Hundreds of women have met the ultimate brutality of this toxic culture. The fear of random attack is terrifying but for many women, the terror is at home and the most dangerous person their intimate partner. Yet, every year, women and their children are turned away from refuges because there are no places for them. We have to be honest. While women suffer, the State penny-pinches and, as the words of lip service ring in their ears, vital services struggle to survive.The murder of Ashling Murphy must mark a turning point. Leaders must lead. We need now to stand up and be counted. The public appetite for action now matches the scale of male violence that women face every day. This is our chance to turn the tide. This a rare moment for change. The safety, dignity and lives of women demand political action and unity. A meeting of political leaders must now be convened urgently. We need to unite in agreeing on and driving immediate and long-term action to eliminate violence against women. I ask the Taoiseach to convene this meeting as Head of Government.This is a heartbreaking time, but hearts and lives have been repeatedly broken and each time, once the initial grief cools, the political system goes back to business as usual. This cannot happen again.Gabhaim buíochas leis an Taoiseach. We all send our sympathies and condolences to the Murphy family at this awful time. There are not words really to describe the trauma and grief that family and, as the Taoiseach said, the entire community is experiencing. An ocean of tears has been shed for Ashling and the hundreds of women who have lost their lies in a violent manner.The systemic nature of male violence towards women has now been identified and called out in a powerful way and so it falls to us as legislators, elected representatives and political leaders to lead the way. That is the expectation of us.I share and endorse the Taoiseach's position that we need an all-of-Oireachtas approach to this. This is not a moment for party politics or division, but for unity. It is my strong belief that it is imperative that the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, is at the wheel and leads on this matter. The danger is that when the shock lessens, the initial grief subsides, the headlines have been written, the cameras go away and that poor family is left with the awfulness of their loss, the real test will be what we do in here.We need an all-of-society and whole-of-community response to this complex issue. We cannot legislate misogyny away but we will never see an end to this endemic violence unless we get our act together and are clear that we mean business. That initial meeting of all political leaders should be the beginning of our collective journey and endeavour.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-12-14	---	1	I have dressed in red for the occasion. I thought it would be a bit much to don the beard and the hat so I left them.However, I might get a more positive response from An Taoiseach if I were attired in that manner. In any event, happy Christmas in advance to all.I wish to raise with the Taoiseach his Government's management of the Covid booster roll-out. This morning, on his way to Cabinet, the Taoiseach said it is now a case of all hands on deck because of the Omicron variant, but his urgency comes late in the day. The truth is we needed an all-hands-on-deck approach over two months ago, long before the emergence of the Omicron variant, because at that stage we knew we were facing into a difficult winter. We have known for quite some time that an efficient booster roll-out would be needed to protect people and to safeguard our progress. The fact is the Government's lack of forward planning has led to real issues with the roll-out of the booster. We have seen problems with the alignment of the booking system between the HSE, GPs and pharmacies. This means people have received multiple appointments which stay on the system even when people try to cancel. One person has reported receiving nine appointments and has been declared a no-show for each one, despite no longer living in the State. There have been many instances of people receiving up to five appointments, so I am glad to hear that is being updated, but it is late in the day. The lack of Government planning has also hit the number of vaccinators we have. We are down 500 vaccinators since the summer, which means the booster campaign is now operating at two thirds the capacity of the original roll-out.How has this happened? Clearly, the Government made no contingencies for maintaining capacity in the vaccination network, which is madness. We should not now be facing the need to scramble for vaccinators again. That capacity should have been hardwired into the system. Two years on there is still a lack of preparation and leadership from the Government. That is why we see winding queues and big delays outside vaccination centres. It is why some people have been turned away from the centres and why we are now in a rush to get out doses that are close to expiring. We should not be in this position. All the evidence reflects that the vast majority of people want their boosters. The problem we have is a Government that moves far too slowly and is always playing catch-up. We saw it when it came to use of antigen tests, we saw it when it came to the ventilation of our schools and we see it now again with this booster campaign.Tá an Rialtas ag bogadh go rómhall ar an bhfeachtas teanndáileoige. Tá an t-am le haghaidh fógraí móra thart. Tá sé thar am anois dul i ngleic leis seo. Tá sé thar am na hacmhainní atá ag teastáil a chur ar fáil chun go n-éireodh leis an rolladh amach. The Taoiseach says it is all hands on deck, but the time for big announcements and big targets is over. It is now time for delivery. He says the Government will ramp up the number of vaccinators. Will he tell us by how many? Will he tell us when they will be in place? Will he tell us what additional supports will be given to GPs and pharmacies? Will he guarantee the problems experienced with the appointment system will not be repeated as the campaign is accelerated?The Taoiseach does not have to convince anybody in this House or beyond in respect of the booster. All of the evidence is that people wish to receive their boosters. We have a highly vaccinated population. Therefore, the issues that arise are operational. There is a question mark over the management and leadership of the Taoiseach's Government in rolling out this booster campaign.We have had huge confusion, as I have said, about appointments, we have had long queues, and we have had people being sent away. Now we have a considerable volume of vaccine that will expire that has to be administered to people who wish to get their boosters.I have asked the Taoiseach a series of questions. We clearly need additional vaccinators. How many will we get and when will they be in place? What additional supports does the Taoiseach propose for GPs and pharmacists? It is clear the Government is attaching great importance to and putting great stock in the booster campaign. The issues of capacity are essential. It is not enough to thank those on the front line. We have to enable them to do their job and to deliver this. When the Taoiseach takes to his feet, will he tell us precisely and concretely how many additional vaccinators there will be and when they will be in place? What supports will there be for our GPs and pharmacists?So we are not getting more vaccinators I am assuming.How many and when?How many vaccinators? The Taoiseach does not know.If the Taoiseach does not know how many he should just say so. I would appreciate an answer. It is a very straightforward question.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-12-08	---	1	The Government's approach to housing is failing miserably. Dublin City Council and Cork City Council commissioned KPMG to conduct analysis of future housing needs as part for their development plans for the period 2022 to 2028. These reports are frightening. They reveal that the housing crisis is set to get even worse in the coming years, even if the Government delivers on current policy. Here are the facts according to the reports.In Dublin, average house prices are expected to rise by 36% to more than €500,000. That is mind-boggling. Rents in Dublin will increase by 50% to an average of €2,500 per month. That is not for a family home; it is for a one-bedroom apartment. In the Taoiseach's home city of Cork, the outlook is just as bleak. In his neck of the woods, by 2028 the average cost of a home will be just under €500,000. Renters in the city that the Taoiseach represents, his constituents, are set to be hammered. Rents in Cork are expected to increase by an incredible 36%. These are the projected price increases even if all of the Government's targets are met.Let us imagine a family starting out in Douglas or Carrigaline listening to and realising this. Ordinary workers in Dublin, Cork and throughout the State are already struggling to meet astronomical housing costs. Wages have not increased, and they certainly will not increase at anything like the same rate as price inflation over the next seven years. How on Earth does the Taoiseach expect people to be able to put a roof over their heads?A generation is today locked out of affordable housing and home ownership is a pipe dream for many. We thought the Government's housing crisis could not get any worse but the message from the reports to which I refer is that we have seen nothing yet. Without a radical change in Government housing policy, we are looking at a serious catastrophe; a disaster for workers and families, for society and for Ireland’s long-term economic attractiveness and stability.These are significant reports. They were conducted on behalf of the two largest local authorities in the State in order to allow them to plan the development of their cities. They are based on the most up-to-date data from the CSO and the ESRI. For a Government with an ounce of cop-on, alarm bells would be ringing very loudly. Instead, we get deafening silence, heads stuck in the sand, no urgency to respond, no forward-thinking, and, frankly, no common sense.The Government needs to change the direction of its policy away from the interests of developers and investor funds and focus it squarely on meeting the housing needs of workers and families. The very first thing it should do is significantly ramp up investment in the direct delivery of genuinely affordable homes. The target of 1,250 affordable homes next year is nowhere near enough. We need 8,000 genuinely affordable units every year in order to avoid the nightmare projected in these reports. That is the level of ambition required.Léiríonn na tuairiscí a rinneadh do chomhairlí cathracha Chorcaí agus Bhaile Átha Cliath go bhfuil sé beartaithe go leanfaidh an ghéarchéim tithíochta ar aghaidh agus go bhfuil sí chun éirí níos measa fós. Tá athrú polasaí Rialtas dáiríre ag teastáil go práinneach.My questions are simple. Has the Taoiseach read the reports? Is he concerned by the forecasts they contain? Does he accept that a fundamental change in Government housing policy is required to end the housing crisis?And it is not working. Whatever the Taoiseach's view of me, I am sure he will agree the ESRI and KPMG are not, surely to God, ranting as well, or are they? The evidence they have adduced through a very comprehensive study, using data from the Central Statistics Office, CSO, and ESRI, which are hardly ranters or ravers, show house prices will be at €500,000 on average, or more than that in Dublin and Cork, respectively, and rent will increase by 36% and 50%, respectively. If the Taoiseach thinks that reflects a policy that is working then he is even more adrift from reality than even I feared, at his worst moment.This crisis is set to get worse if the Government persists with its current policy. Those are the facts. We saw figures from the Banking and Payments Federation Ireland, BPFI, showing almost half of first-time buyers must run to their parents for help to secure a deposit. It is called the bank of mammy and daddy. Not every mammy and daddy are in a position to bankroll every son and daughter. Those who can are the fortunate ones. All the evidence stacks up that this Government is failing. Its housing policy is failing. However, the really alarming thing is it will not look to the evidence and it will not set out a coherent plan for success in housing. It prefers instead to attack the Opposition.We do not.Is KPMG insincere as well?I hope the Taoiseach makes a new year's resolution to actually answer questions that are put to him. It is kind of embarrassing for the Head of Government to behave like that.Honest to God.Micheál's headline achievement for 2021. Well done.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-12-08	---	2	Yesterday, I raised the contract signed by government with National Broadband Ireland, NBI, and pointed out that the majority shareholder of that consortium is Oak Hill Advisors, a firm with more expertise in dealing with distressed debt than infrastructural projects. Broadband roll-out is behind schedule and there are major concerns regarding the structure of the contract with NBI. It was the single biggest contract entered into by the State, with more than €2 billion of public money on the line for a network the State will not even own.When the contract was signed, the Government gave assurances that the consortium would have to put up more than €200 million of its own funds. That has not happened. The company has invested less than half of that amount and has already recouped €50 million in fees. That looks like a sweet deal for the consortium and a bad deal for Ireland.Has the Taoiseach ensured that no taxpayer money will be used on this project until the more than €200 million of the consortium's money has been invested in the network? That was the commitment that was made. It is vital we get this sorted out. The people of rural Ireland, in particular, have waited long enough for broadband and the Government must get this right.Can you answer my question?That is not an answer to the question.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	debate	2021-12-08	---	3	For the purposes of clarity, the Minister of State has repeatedly indicated that the effect of the Deputy's amendment would be to force up cover costs. Can she set out precisely how that could be the case? I have listened to the exchange and I am unclear as to how or why that claim is being made by the Minister of State.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-12-07	---	1	Storm Barra is raging outside and bringing significant disruption to families, workers and businesses, especially in those counties under red and orange warnings. Today and tonight, people need to stay safe. No one should take chances or risks. It is important that we pay tribute to our front-line workers. After 18 months of heroism, they now find themselves in the eye of the storm, again risking their own safety to keep us safe and the show on the road. We thank them.Our children are not in school today because of this exceptional storm. We are now in winter and our children and teaching staff have been freezing in classrooms wearing hats and scarves during the school day, with windows wide open in an attempt to keep them safe. We are nearly two years into this pandemic, but the Government has still not delivered a plan for proper ventilation in our schools. It has been clear for some time that high-efficiency particulate air, HEPA, filters have an important role to play in ensuring schools have clean air. They remove contaminants and viruses from the air and help reduce airborne transmission in classrooms with poor ventilation. The WHO, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, ECDC, and the Government's own expert group on ventilation have emphasised the value of HEPA filters in keeping schools safe. Instead of listening to this expert advice and installing HEPA filters in schools, the Government's approach is, as the Taoiseach put it at his press conference on Friday, to open the windows and so on.Parents and school staff must have been shaking their heads in disbelief. This refusal to act on filtration in schools reminds us of the Government's reticence to accept the advice on mask wearing at the start of the pandemic and its failure to incorporate antigen tests until the eleventh hour in the fight against Covid. We again see no sense of urgency, no forward planning and no common sense from the Government on the issue of ventilation in schools.It has been known for some time that Covid is an airborne virus and we knew that schools would be a greater challenge in the face of a more transmissible variant. The rates of infection among school-aged children have shot up in recent months. The writing is on the wall and the Government has had ample time and every opportunity to get things right, yet it has wasted these opportunities.In December last year, Deputy Ó Laoghaire called on the Minister for Education to ensure that schools were provided with devices over the Christmas break to make sure children returned to safely ventilated classrooms last January. He was ignored. Indeed, it took nine months for the Government to act on CO2 monitors. These monitors are badly needed but they do not clean the air. They have to be backed up with a filtration system. We do not have another nine months to wait for the Government to get HEPA devices into classrooms.Tá sé thar am anois chun a bheith dáiríre faoi aeráil cheart sna scoileanna agus ag coinneáil páistí agus baill fhoirne sábháilte. Tá sé thar am ag an Rialtas scagairí HEPA a fháil i seomraí ranga chomh tapa agus is féidir.Does the Taoiseach accept we must move beyond opening windows as a plan for ventilation in school and will he commit to immediately commencing the installation of HEPA filters in classrooms?Of course, there is no single silver bullet, more is the pity, and there is no single answer, including vaccination, although I am never one to lampoon either fresh air or the need for vaccination and for boosters, which is absolutely imperative. However, I asked the Taoiseach a different question. I asked him about ventilation and air quality in our classrooms. Between removing contact tracing from schools, a very sluggish response to teaching supply and mixed and confused messaging on children wearing masks in schools, the Government's record in dealing with staff and children in the classroom is not good. To say to staff and children that the answer is to shiver in classrooms is not acceptable. These HEPA filters are one item, an important item, in the toolbox that we have to keep people safe.I have asked the Taoiseach a very straightforward question. I have quoted the expert advice. The World Health Organization, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control and, indeed, the expert group that his own Government appointed recognise that these filters are an important intervention. Instead of taking a  approach with schools, I want the Taoiseach to commit that the Government will ensure that these filters are rolled out. Use the Christmas break, use the opportunity of the kids being on holidays, to install these ventilators and to ensure that we have clean air and that we do not have frozen children and staff members, as one action, but an important action, in an array of things we will have to do to keep our children safe.Is that a “Yes”?I did not approve of the Government’s handling of them. I am sure the Taoiseach was very clear on that. I could not have been clearer.Is the Taoiseach going to answer my question?Will he answer my question? He is the Taoiseach.Really. Okay. Thank you. It is kind of pathetic but-----For every classroom.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-11-24	---	1	As we speak, hundreds of truckers and hauliers are protesting outside the gates of the Dáil because they are being absolutely crucified. These are small and family businesses that are already put to the pin of their collar with rip-off insurance costs, extortionate utility bills and the domestic cost of living and sky-rocketing increases in fuel costs are the final straw for many. Hauliers are essential workers who played a huge part in keeping the show on the road during the Covid emergency. Their protest today is a reaction to the escalating cost of energy and the fuel crisis. The Government needs to show up for them now with an alleviation package that includes an overhaul of the diesel rebate scheme to make it really work for this sector.People are under real, unbearable and ever-increasing pressure. Since last year the price of electricity is up by 16%, gas is up by 23% and home heating oil by an incredible 71%. How on earth can any family be expected to afford to heat their home with jumps like these? People are overwhelmed but the Government sits on its hands. Indeed, the Government has come along with a hike in carbon taxes which will undoubtedly make things even worse for families and businesses, including those who are demonstrating today. The carbon tax hike needs to be scrapped because it is the wrong move at the wrong time. The truth is that households face a real emergency in heating and lighting their homes and running their vehicles. The weather is getting colder and it is getting darker. Thousands of workers have now been told to work from home so people will have their heating and lighting on earlier and for longer and their bills, consequently, will go up even further. We know that workers and families have been through a very tough 18 months. Many were just getting back on their feet and just about coping. Christmas is a happy time but it is also a very expensive time of the year. People do not need the added stress of enormous energy bills landing through the door in December, January and February. The cost of staying warm is also incredibly stressful for our older people, for whom the cold weather can be especially dangerous. The increase in the fuel allowance simply will not bridge the gap and much more needs to be done.We know that there are international factors at play in all of this and that big energy companies have passed the extraordinary global price increases on to customers. However, the Government must respond with ideas and actions to alleviate the pressure on families and businesses. Tá billí fuinnimh ag imeacht as smacht. Tá daoine agus gnóthaí faoi bhrú. Tá briseadh iomlán ag teastáil uathu. Iarraim ar an Rialtas an VAT ar bhillí fuinnimh a tharscaoileadh ar feadh trí mhí. There are things that can be done. Recently I asked the Taoiseach to engage with the European Commission and to temporarily waive VAT on energy bills for a period of three months but he refused to answer me on that occasion. I put it to him again that this is a common sense intervention that would make a real difference. It is something that has already been implemented by others in the EU seeking to protect their people from current energy hikes. Will the Taoiseach waive the VAT on energy bills for three months and give workers and families a real break?No, I do not want to defer anything. On the contrary-----Who informed the Taoiseach? Was it the Commission?I have put forward two propositions to the Taoiseach. First, the carbon tax will have the effect of increasing people's bills. That is a matter of fact. I have also advanced the proposition of waiving VAT on a temporary basis for three months. The Taoiseach has knocked both of those back.We are all well aware that the energy crisis is global. I am not laying that at the Taoiseach's feet, but it is his responsibility as Taoiseach and that of the Government to respond to the crisis for households and businesses. For example, Lorraine from the Taoiseach's neck of the woods in Cork sent me her bills. She sent me a bill from May 2021 and one from October 2021 for heating her home and in that time her bill has jumped €100. What is the Government doing for Lorraine today and coming into the winter? She has a house full of kids, three or four of them to raise, and they are struggling. There are families like that right across the State. What is the Taoiseach doing for those families, never mind his view on me or what I have to say? He is the Taoiseach. What is he going to do? Has he spoken to the Commission about the VAT option?Has he explored that fully? Has he put it to the Commission that he wishes to do that? If my ideas are not runners, what are the Taoiseach's ideas? What is he doing for families and businesses now?Did the Taoiseach speak to the Commission?Did the Taoiseach speak to the Commission?When did he have the discussion?I am sorry. I interrupted the Taoiseach because-----Lorraine is in Cork. She is not-----What is the Taoiseach going to do for her?That is far too little.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-11-24	---	2	Yesterday, I raised with the Taoiseach the fact that so many people could not access PCR tests and he told me that this was not a problem. Today, there are no PCR tests available in 14 counties according to the HSE's portal. There are no PCR tests available in Carlow, Cork, Dublin, Kildare, Kilkenny, Meath, Tipperary, Waterford, Wexford, Wicklow, Kerry, Laois, Louth and Leitrim.For people experiencing symptoms or in a household where someone is experiencing symptoms, not being able to access these tests is frustrating and frightening. Indeed, many have had to travel up to four hours to access a test. That is not acceptable.I want to know what is the Taoiseach doing about this and how we have allowed this to come to pass at a time where a surge was predicted. The surge has arrived and we find people left in these situations.Let the Taoiseach not tell me that this is not an issue. It is a big issue for people across the State.For the wonderful Minister to make a botch of it again.Fourteen counties with none.That is correct.When will people in those 14 counties be able to get tests?This winter, Taoiseach.This is happening now.Does the Taoiseach live in the real world?I find that hard to believe.My God.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-11-23	---	1	I send all of our best wishes to our colleague, the Ceann Comhairle, Seán Ó Fearghaíl, and wish him a full and speedy recovery.The failure of the Government to plan for the Covid surge has created substantial pressure. GP services are overwhelmed, and schools are struggling. In large swathes of the country, people cannot get a PCR test while the Government still dithers on antigen testing. In our hospitals, especially ICUs, we see the sharpest impact. The capacity crisis in ICUs did not happen overnight. A HSE-commissioned expert report published in September 2009 recommended that the number of intensive care unit beds be increased from 289 to 579. Successive Governments have known about this problem for more than a decade and have done nothing. They cut a further 40 beds out of the system between the publication of that report in 2009 and the onset of Covid.This lack of foresight has continued throughout the pandemic. The vaccination programme and lockdowns bought precious time to prepare hospital capacity for surges but the Government has wasted these opportunities. Even in the recent budget, it tinkered around the edges with ICU capacity. We do not have the necessary number of personnel to staff our ICUs safely, even in normal times. Experts tell us that we need between 150 and 200 additional ICU beds and more specialist staff for hospitals to cope. The failure to properly resource our hospitals has devastating consequences and serious knock-on effects for our society. Protecting our health service from collapse is a key reason for the prolonged use of restrictions.Lack of capacity also has dangerous consequences for those requiring vital care and life-saving procedures. Earlier this month, a transplant operation was cancelled in Dublin's Mater hospital because no ICU bed was available. I cannot imagine how distressing this was for the patient, the patient's family and for the doctors who had to make this call. There should have been an ICU bed for this patient and there would have been if the Government had planned properly. We are already playing catch-up on missed non-Covid care. We are facing a tsunami of missed care in the coming months. Not having the additional ICU capacity is putting patients at risk. The Government continues to turn up a day late and a dollar short. We are two years into the pandemic and 12 years into the ICU capacity crisis and the Government has not even come close to doing enough for ICU capacity. As we watch our hospitals fill up again and restrictions are reimposed, people are asking what the Government is waiting for.Tá an ganntanas leapacha sna hionaid dianchúraim, ICU, ag cur brú ar na hospidéil agus ag cur na n-othar i mbaol. Caithfidh an Rialtas rud éigin a dhéanamh go práinneach chun acmhainní na n-ionad dianchúraim a mhéadú go dtí an leibhéal riachtanach. What is the Government's plan for ICUs to meet this surge? What is the status of our surge capacity and when will it be deployed? Has the Taoiseach instructed the Minister for Health to begin properly and permanently resourcing our ICUs to the required levels in order that we do not end up here again?Despite the Taoiseach's attempts to reassure or to advance the pretence that we have enough capacity in our hospitals, the evidence is that we had staff protesting outside Connolly hospital and, for example, in Limerick hospital other beds are being repurposed for use as ICU beds.It is very clear the capacity falls well short of what is needed and that fact was established as far back as 2009. The fact also is that there was not an ICU bed for that transplant operation to occur, which was very traumatic for all concerned, particularly the patient and the patient's family.To make it clear for the Dáil, what is the plan now for ICU capacity as infection numbers are growing and hospitalisations increase? The Taoiseach has confirmed we have a surge capacity; to 350 I think he said. When will that be deployed? When will the Taoiseach and Minister for Health make the permanent investment we need in ICU to get us to a reasonable place where we are not constantly facing this danger and jeopardy?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-11-17	---	1	"Last night the Taoiseach announced measures to curb the Covid-19 surge. Nobody wanted a backwards step in the progress won over a long, hard and often heartbreaking 18 months. We now find ourselves in a very difficult situation. Difficult situations require decisive leadership, forward planning and thoughtful management, all of which are absent from the Taoiseach’s Government. Indeed, there has been Government paralysis facing into this wave of infection. The surge in Covid-19 numbers did not happen overnight. Public health officials have been ringing the alarm bells loudly for weeks. That is why it is so very difficult to understand the Government’s dithering, delaying and indecision on antigen testing, the resourcing of our health services and on the booster vaccination campaign.The use of antigen testing was recommended as far back as last April, but on the radio this morning the Minister for Health, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, still could not detail any plan. Other countries are streets ahead of us on antigen testing, with free and subsidised schemes to reduce costs for people. The Government's failure to prepare to increase capacity in our health service is demonstrated in its winter plan and it leaves us dangerously exposed. The lack of pace and planning around the booster campaign has also set us back. The majority of healthcare workers were ready for their third dose in October, but many will not now be done until December. A quick and efficient roll-out of boosters was a no-brainer and, again, other countries have been up and at it much faster.The only thing the Government seems capable of doing quickly is shutting things down. The Taoiseach can call it whatever he wants, but he has effectively shut down the late-night sector with less than 48 hours' notice and no consultation. Three weeks ago, the Taoiseach announced the reopening of this sector and last night he closed it back down like the flick of a switch. This is a massive blow to workers and businesses in the live entertainment and late-night industries that have endured a devastating 18 months. Now, weeks before Christmas and with the cost of living soaring, these workers are prevented from earning again. The Taoiseach told the Dáil yesterday that there is no plan to reopen the pandemic unemployment payment, PUP, or to delay cuts to it. The Minister, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, reiterated that position on the radio this morning. This is not a runner.This shutdown stops thousands of workers earning the money they need to pay their bills. They and families must be protected. The message from the Government to these workers so far, that they should go and find another job, is deeply insulting. These are skilled people, such as musicians, event planners, DJs, comedians and entertainers, and it is important that their skills are maintained within their sector so that it has the chance to flourish when it reopens. Tá easpa pleanála agus ullmhúcháin an Rialtais leis an mborradh Covid seo do-ghlactha. Ní mór a chinntiú go gcoinnítear tacaíochtaí d'oibrithe agus do ghnóthaí a bhfuil thíos leis an dúnadh. I want the Taoiseach to tell the workers and employers affected by this shutdown that they will be provided with the PUP, that the cuts will be halted and that they will be supported.He was not giving them-----It is a source of deep regret to me that not alone can Mícheál Martin's Government not take decisive action, but that he is singularly unable to answer very straightforward questions again.The facts are these: the Government is behind the curve on antigen testing and on the booster programme and the facts stack that up.Attacking me and conjuring up all of this does not prove anything.Let us deal with the most immediate matter at hand. The Government has taken a decision which shuts down late-night industries, such as events, hospitality etc. This is going to have an impact on thousands of workers who can no longer earn their living. I ask the Taoiseach to forget his political smoke and mirrors, and I put it to him as a matter of just straightforward fairness that those workers and businesses have to be supported.I again invite the Taoiseach to make clear that workers will be able to avail of the PUP, that businesses will be supported and that he will not throw thousands of workers under the bus as a consequence of his poor management and lack of decisive leadership. I call on him to support those workers and their families.Do you want to trade seats? When I am in your seat, I will answer questions. You should not worry about that.Will workers be able to avail of the PUP? I am asking for a ""Yes"" or a ""No""."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-11-17	---	2	Despite the widespread rejection of the report of the Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes and Certain Related Matters, the Government has based its redress scheme on its findings. Survivors and families have been consistent in the demand for inclusive redress, redress that recognises the human rights abuse of forced family separation. The Government has ignored the mothers and their children on both fronts. It is deeply hurtful that the Government has created a hierarchy of survivors, taking the view that some mothers and their children suffered less than others. The Government delivered this scheme knowing there are women in the courts this very week seeking to right the wrongs of the commission’s report but, rather than hear those voices, the Government has doubled down on the failures of the commission. How does the Taoiseach justify this? If the Government will not listen to the voices of survivors, Sinn Féin and others in opposition will do so and we will use our time in the Dáil next week to give voice to them.Now you have closed a section.The Government has closed a section-----
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-11-16	---	1	The need to build capacity in our hospitals has never been more urgent. Decades of bad Government policy meant that our health service was at breaking point before we ever heard of Covid-19. Now we face the most serious health emergency of a lifetime. However, despite what the past 18 months have taught us, there is a real absence of urgency and planning from the Government. We need more beds and staff. We must dramatically improve diagnostic and theatre capacity. Incredibly, however, the Government has waited until the middle of November to come forward with its winter plan for the health service.As far back as July, Sinn Féin and others said there was no time to wait. We called for preparations for winter to start at that point and urgently. We drafted a plan, sent it to the Minister for Health, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, and we were ignored. The Government's plan does not go far enough. In fact, it is built on the failures of the recent budget. Like the budget, the plan does not provide for one additional acute bed beyond what was already committed, nor has it provided the increase in ICU beds needed to meet this emergency. Front-line staff have been left outside hospitals protesting over unsafe staffing levels, but the plan does nothing to improve recruitment for the health service, where it can take up to six months to recruit a nurse and a year and more to recruit a consultant. How can that be justified? My colleague, Deputy Cullinane, has met with hospital managers in Cork, Sligo, Galway and beyond, all of whom have capital requests lodged for months. They are left to wait. This means that badly-needed 50- to 100-bed expansions are delayed indefinitely. The capital approvals process does not work. It is simply too slow.Even if we had not been hit by a pandemic, the Government's plan falls far short of what is needed to meet the challenge faced by hospitals even in a normal year. This should have been a plan for real progress and ambition. Instead, it is a plan for our creaking hospitals to stand still. The price for this lack of planning and urgency will be paid by patients left to wait on trolleys in hospital corridors. By the way, there are 409 such patients on trolleys today. It will be paid by children with scoliosis and other conditions crying out for procedures that would change their lives. It will also be paid by front-line healthcare workers, who are denied the resources to do their jobs and are left to work in stress cauldron conditions.Ní théann plean an gheimhridh sách fada. Is é anois an t-am chun an cúram sláinte a fháil i gceart. Tá níos mó leapacha agus níos mó foirne ag teastáil sa tseirbhís sláinte uainn. Teastaíonn práinn agus seachadadh uainn. We need a big step forward from Government and we need a real change. Does the Taoiseach accept the urgent need to significantly ramp up the number of beds in the system? Will he immediately address the bottlenecks in the capital approvals process so that those hospitals can press ahead with their expansions? Will he act on the call made by the Irish Medical Organisation, IMO to cut the extraordinary time taken to recruit healthcare staff?As ever with the Taoiseach's Government, it is a case of too little and too late. The middle of November is not the time to produce the winter emergency plan, with the greatest of respect to all involved. That work should have been done in the summer. The facts are that the mistake made at budget time, where not one additional acute inpatient or community bed beyond what had been previously committed to was budgeted for, has been repeated in the winter plan. Resources and money are not everything but if he speaks to anybody working in any hospital across the State, they will give him chapter and verse as to how stretched they are and refer to the fact that resources are lacking. We need more beds, including more acute beds and ICU capacity.We also need the capital approvals process to be streamlined. The resources held back include, for example, 96 beds for Limerick, 50 beds for Sligo, 50 beds for Cork and I could go on and on. Similarly, on the recruitment process, would the Taoiseach believe me if I told him the average recruitment time for a consultant is 562 days? It is six months for a nurse. Hospital managers across the State know this is ludicrous. This is a bureaucratic nightmare, Orwellian in its proportions.Rather than the Taoiseach simply expressing interest or concern in this, it is his job to ensure this is sorted and these bottlenecks caused by excessive bureaucracy can be cut.There is a lack of capacity in hospitals.I reiterate to the Taoiseach that the funds and resources must be made available. He has failed in that regard. It is astonishing stuff.Is there an example?Sorry, who was-----The Taoiseach should be clear. Which hospital was it?Which hospital?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	debate	2021-11-10	---	1	The Taoiseach's policy and his Minister are failing. Supply is, of course, the issue and that is why the Taoiseach should have embraced the ESRI recommendation to double capital investment in the delivery of homes, but he did not do that. His top economist trashed that report. I ask him not to lecture me or anyone else on the Opposition benches on the issue of supply, while simultaneously allowing a high-ranking Government official to undermine the argument for supplying the resources to underpin it. I do not know if the Taoiseach heard the figures I gave to him. There has been a 20% increase in rents in some Connacht counties and an increase of almost 20% in Munster. I have asked the Taoiseach very simply to take actions that would make the world of difference now to the 300,000 renters in this State. I am asking him to introduce measures that will cut their rents now - cut their rents - not allow for a further increase and I have asked him to introduce a measure to ban increases for three years. Here is the truth: that is what needs to needs to happen. I want him to answer straightforwardly whether he will do those two things. Yes or no?Blah, blah, blah. I ask the Taoiseach to answer the question.That is why we have increases in rent of 20%.If that is the Taoiseach's idea of success----------he is really in trouble, more trouble than even I imagined.There is no answer.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-11-09	---	1	Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have bent over backwards for cuckoo funds. The catalogue of advantages they have given them include sweetheart tax deals, fast-track planning and reduced apartment design standards. Their support for cuckoo funds pushes ordinary people out of the housing market as they gobble up family homes in bulk and rent those homes back to families at extortionate rents.Public anger came to boiling point earlier this year when a cuckoo fund was set to sweep up the majority of homes in a development in Maynooth from under the noses of ordinary home buyers. Instead of taking real action to clip the wings of these funds, their response was very limp. The stamp duty increase of 10% is easily absorbed by wealthy funds, which continue to pay zero tax on the hundreds of millions of euro they make from the outrageous rents they charge. Of course, they excluded apartments from the stamp duty increase, which means it is still open season for cuckoo funds on more than half of the homes that are built in this city. They literally hung the flag of surrender over Dublin for these investors. Then the Minister, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, dropped the stamp duty increase for funds that bulk-buy family homes if they lease those homes back to local authorities. That decision will see the State hand over €1 billion to cuckoo funds.That was not meaningful action to put manners on these funds. Indeed, it showed them they really have nothing to fear from the Taoiseach's Government. When it comes to a choice between showing up for those in housing need or maintaining the power of wealthy investors, the Taoiseach has made it very clear whose side he is on.Now it is a case of here we go again because on Sunday we learned the Taoiseach's Ministers, Deputies Darragh O’Brien and Paschal Donohoe, are looking to dust off the red carpet again and roll it out for these funds. As house prices continue to soar beyond the reach of ordinary workers and as extortionate rents continue to spin out of control, the Taoiseach's Ministers set out on a mission to attract in more of the very funds that wreck the housing market and rob people of an affordable roof over their heads.There is no public support for this insanity. People want a change of direction. They want a Government that will take the lead and build homes that workers and families can afford to buy or rent. This is where the Taoiseach's focus and that of his Ministers should be, not on cosying up even further with cuckoo funds.Tá tacaíocht an Taoisigh do na cuach-chistí ag spreagadh na géarchéime tithíochta seo. Ní féidir leis dul ar aghaidh. Tá daoine ag lorg rialtais atá chun tithe a thógáil a mbeidh oibrithe agus teaghlaigh in ann iad a cheannach nó a chíosadh. Did the Taoiseach know about this roadshow and approve of it? Can he tell us whom his Ministers intend to meet? Does he know that? What new sweetheart deals or incentives are they offering to these investors to bring them to Ireland? It is in the public interest that details of the Ministers' proposed cuckoo fund roadshow be published urgently. I want the Taoiseach to commit to this.Because you do not want to answer my question.Nobody is against investment and Ireland is open for business. We all know that----------but the Taoiseach's treatment of cuckoo funds and putting their needs over those of ordinary citizens has made an international laughing stock of Ireland. Now the Government is trying to take an entire generation, which is locked out of affordable housing, for fools. There are no fools out there. That is the truth. The Taoiseach had a lot to say, but he did not answer my question so, if I may----------I will attempt to ask it again. Can he confirm the Ministers, Deputies Darragh O'Brien and Donohoe, will meet with and make a presentation to these cuckoo funds? Will that roadshow happen? Did he know about it and did he approve it? Who are his Ministers proposing to meet? What are they offering to these funds to entice them to Ireland? I would like the Taoiseach to answer those questions because those are the important matters that arise when we discover that far from learning any lessons, here we go again, with a Fianna Fáil-led Government and cuckoo funds.I ask the Taoiseach to answer the question.The Taoiseach is making a show of himself.The Taoiseach is considerably over time and is not answering questions.Are the Ministers to meet with these funds? Yes or no?The Taoiseach has not answered.Well, many things are out of order.What is out of order is the Taoiseach's Ministers running and cosying up to cuckoo funds in the midst of a housing crisis.I asked the questions and they have not been answered.The Deputy should get his boss to answer the questions then. How is that?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-11-03	---	1	"The cost of living is out of control. Workers and families are at breaking point as they struggle to keep up with sky-high bills. Their quality of life, their ability to plan for their future and their mental health are now really suffering. People are fleeced with extortionate rents and rip-off insurance costs. Childcare fees are the equivalent of a second mortgage, the price of the weekly shop has gone up, while households have been hammered by more than 30 increases in energy and fuel bills just this year. Many people feel they are caught running an unwinnable race with no end. This is no way for people to live.My colleague, Deputy Kerrane, has an online survey on the cost-of-living crisis. So far, just over a number of days, 14,000 people have responded. I would like to share some of the responses with the Taoiseach.Siobhan said:I am commuting from Quilty Co Clare to Limerick to work. I am paying upwards of €75 on diesel a week, that’s an increase of €15 a week compared to June, the price of food is also rising. I will soon have to buy oil for the house and that price too is also rising. I will not be able to afford my basic needs to survive.Alison said:My husband and I both work. We have two kids. Our rent is €1200 per month. Childcare for the two of them is over €1000. We are drowning in debt, car loans and bills. My husband is signed off as he is now suicidal. It is devastating.Kevin said:I work full time, earning what is considered a decent wage. I'm living month to month using my credit card for any extra spending. No nights out, no family holidays, no fancy house. I work to pay essential living costs. I cannot plan for a rainy day.This is just a glimpse of what people are going through. In the budget debate, Sinn Féin outlined for the Taoiseach how he could start getting the cost of living under control. We called on him to cut rents and put a month’s rent back into tenants’ pockets through a tax credit but he did nothing for them. We asked him to cut childcare fees by two thirds, but he chose instead to cap fees at their current unaffordable rate. All he did was make it harder for people to light and heat their homes with another carbon tax hike.People are at the end of their tether. The Taoiseach cannot continue to sit on his hands; he needs to start standing up for people. So far, he has ignored our calls to respond to the cost-of-living crisis but today I am going to try again to get him to respond because I believe he has an opportunity to make a difference on energy costs. There are options. Ba cheart dó VAT a ghearradh mar tá daoine faoi bhrú. Caithfigh an Rialtas sos a thabhairt dóibh. I ask the Taoiseach to temporarily cut VAT to zero on energy bills for the winter months to give people some breathing room. Has he considered this action? Has he discussed it with the European Commission? Temporarily cutting VAT on energy bills would alleviate at least some of the pressure people are under. I ask him to do this as a matter of urgency.The Taoiseach cited external factors such as Brexit, Covid and the global energy market, but failed to answer the straightforward question I asked him. He has done nothing to alleviate the hardship that Siobhan, Alison and Kevin are experiencing. In fact, in the budget he did nothing for renters. He proposed to freeze unaffordable childcare fees at their current extortionate rate, and he introduced a carbon tax hike that will drive up people’s bills. I have asked him to change tack to respond to the realities of people’s lives. I have asked him to reduce VAT to 0% temporarily for the winter months to give some relief to families, workers and others who are struggling. The Taoiseach should not tell us what he cannot do; he should tell us what he will do and address the issue of VAT. The Czech Republic, as he knows, has made a move to cut VAT on energy bills to 0%. I ask him to follow suit and give some relief to families and others who are really suffering.What about VAT on energy bills?There is no each-way bet.Siobhan is not seeing it and neither are Alison or Kevin.What about VAT? Will I take that as a ""No""?What about VAT?The Government blocked legislation introduced by Deputy Doherty to deal with this gratuitously."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-11-03	---	2	"I want to raise the ongoing failure to provide fair pay and allowances for student nurses and midwives. The Minister for Health, Deputy Donnelly, has had the McHugh report into this matter sitting on his desk for three months. We tabled a motion yesterday evening and the Minister's remarks during that debate only extended to extending the pandemic payment for a year and vague references to what he called ""other measures"". At this stage, it is completely unacceptable. These students put their own welfare and lives on the line to assist others.Only for them our health service would have ground to a standstill.The McHugh report needs to be published urgently and there needs to be engagement with the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation, INMO, and other unions. We also need to see permanent fair pay and allowances for all our student nurses and midwives. Will the Taoiseach commit to the immediate publication of the McHugh report and respect recognition and reward for these incredible young professionals, midwives and nurses?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-10-20	---	1	As the Taoiseach knows, children from Donegal whose families have been affected and devastated by the mica scandal are protesting outside the Dáil and are standing in the rain as we speak. They left their homes and the hills of Donegal at 6 a.m. this morning. These children should not have had to travel all the way to Dublin. Like all others, these children should enjoy a carefree childhood and they should not have to worry about their homes crumbling around them. They should not have to witness the intense and often unbearable pressure that their parents and wider families live with every day.On Monday we heard from Mackenzie McDaid, aged 12, speaking about how living in a mica-affected home impacts on her. She said:I worry when I go to sleep that the roof is going to fall on top of me. I was sleeping in my bedroom and I heard a big bang and a big pile of plaster had fallen off the wall. There are 15 out of 16 in my class who have mica and know that they have mica. We would be very worried and we kind of comfort each other by talking to each other about it.Outside the gates of the Dáil this morning more children told me of how they wish their home to be their happy place. They asked why they have to be afraid when they are playing in their home place. They had written to the Taoiseach and they asked him to come out and meet them. They are disappointed that they have not seen the Taoiseach and they want him to come out, look them in the eye and explain to them why they are living this nightmare.The mica and pyrite scandal affects families in Donegal as well as families in Mayo, Sligo, Limerick, Clare and Tipperary. Support for all these victims of mica and pyrite is not just national but international because all of us can at least try to understand the heartache and trauma of your family home and sanctuary crumbling around you. The impact on people's mental health and relationships has been immense and families have been broken by this. In June I visited some of the homes again and on that visit I heard the stories of gable walls cracking, chimneys about to collapse and all of the misery this causes. I have spoken to people who live in caravans but who still pay a big mortgage for a home that is disintegrating. These families have asked me time and again to put their cases front and centre. That is why the motion for 100% redress came in June and it was passed unanimously by the Dáil but it seems to me it is being ignored by the Government.Níl sé seo cóir ar na teaghlaigh seo. Tá cabhair uathu ón Rialtas chun deireadh a chur lena bpian. Dúirt an Taoiseach, an tAire Tithíochta, Rialtais Áitiúil agus Oidhreachta agus an tAire Caiteachais Phoiblí agus Athchóirithe go dtabharfadh siad cúnamh dóibh ach táimid anseo arís le leanaí ag agóid taobh amuigh den Dáil ionas go n-éistfidh an Rialtas leo. Caithfear seo a cheartú. I note that the Minister is to brief the Taoiseach and other leaders on a revised mica redress scheme this week but the only thing the families want to, need to or should hear is that the Government will deliver 100% redress, no ifs, buts or maybes. Those affected by the scandal have had their fill of promises and they have had enough tea and sympathy from Government. They want a solution. These families wait and wait while staring at cracks in their homes and enduring the cracks in their lives. This is a matter of justice. Does the Taoiseach support 100% redress? I want him to make that clear and to tell those standing outside that 100% redress is what will be delivered.Yes, and it failed.There is no narrative.I cannot think of a more appropriately political issue than protecting and vindicating the rights of children. That is politics. The political choices made around this issue are what define the agony, torment and upset those children endure. You designed a scheme and it failed. We need a scheme that works.Such a scheme would provide 100% redress for these families. I asked the Taoiseach a straightforward question; does he support and will he deliver 100% redress? I have heard alibis, excuses and an attack on my motivations but I have not heard any clarity from the Taoiseach and Head of Government. It is the Taoiseach's job to ensure these children get the relief and vindication of their rights that they deserve. As the Taoiseach is in the hot seat, I want to ask this simple question again. Does the Taoiseach support 100% redress or not? It is as simple as that.I was referring to the Taoiseach's Government.Did the Taoiseach not have anything to do with that?Answer the question.Answer the question.Answer the question.It did not work.The Taoiseach is not answering the question.Answer the question.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-10-20	---	2	There is more bad news today for renters as the Residential Tenancies Board, RTB, calculator reflects that rent inflation now stands at 4.3%. This is at a time when rents are extortionate and at a time when many younger people will now weigh up their options and decide whether to stay or to go once the Covid restrictions lift. It is a disgrace the Government did not show up for renters. There was nothing in the budget for them. We told the Government when it linked rents to inflation that it was too little too late. We asked the Government, and I ask again, for a ban on rent increases for the three years and to put a month's rent back in renters' pockets by way of a tax credit. That is what is needed so people can have some chance to live a decent life here.That is disputed.The Government does not want to.Rents there are nothing like they are here.The Government has no answers.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-10-19	---	1	"Before I begin, I offer my condolences to the family and friends of Máire Mhac an tSaoi, Brendan Kennelly, Paddy Moloney and Tony MacMahon, all pillars of Irish arts and culture for so many years. Their deaths are a huge loss to us all, or as Theo Dorgan - the Taoiseach is aware he is an another Corkman - so eloquently put it, we are so much poorer for their absence and so much richer for their lives and for their work.Today, the Cabinet has announced plans for further easing of restrictions. Covid is a horrendous virus and it is still with us. Thankfully, our population is largely vaccinated and this should allow us to proceed safely back to normal, but our healthcare capacity leaves us vulnerable. The crisis that we face now is a hospital bed and capacity crisis. Science has done its bit, medical professionals have done more than their bit, but the Government has failed to step up.Here are the facts. Hospitals across the State are seeing record levels of overcrowding. Emergency departments are overflowing. The trolley count is rising. It is 416 today. Health waiting lists now stand at almost 1 million waiting for care, and almost a quarter of a million of those have been waiting for more than 18 months. Yet, in the face of this crisis, and increasing Covid numbers, the response of the Government in the budget was not one single additional inpatient bed. Not one. How are we to make it through the winter? How will burnt-out, front-line workers cope? How will the health service survive? The Government's approach means that for the remainder of this year and the entirety of next year, we will have no additional inpatient hospital beds. Is the Taoiseach seriously suggesting that no additional inpatient beds are needed until 2023?The crisis is now, the overcrowding is happening now, the trolley count rises now and waiting lists are growing. Phil Ní Sheaghdha of the INMO has said of our hospitals: “They cannot cope today, they won't be coping tonight and they won't be coping tomorrow."" This is a very stark warning and the Taoiseach needs to listen.None of this has come out of the blue. The Taoiseach has to have known that this crisis would hit our hospitals hard in the wintertime. Indeed, last July, Sinn Féin and our colleague, Deputy David Cullinane, called for planning for the winter to start then. We urged the Government to prepare for what was to come. We called for an additional 600 inpatient beds and the recruitment of staff to service those beds and we repeated that call in our budget. The Taoiseach chooses to ignore those calls. He chooses not to properly invest in and resource our hospitals, and that leaves us exposed again. So, now, the chickens come home to roost, and it is patients, hospital staff and wider society who pay the heavy price. Tá ár n-ospidéil faoi bhrú ollmhór. Ní féidir leo déileáil leis an mbrú sin. Caithfidh an Rialtas infheistíocht a dhéanamh iontu anois.I want the Taoiseach to change direction immediately. I am calling on him to do that. I want him to provide the investment needed, increase the number of beds in our hospitals, relieve the overcrowding and lift the intense, unbearable pressure on front-line staff, who are now beyond breaking point. This must be a central plank in the Government's response to the Covid-19 crisis.Covid is a terrible virus and sickness, and it is with us to stay. The level of vaccination, at more than 90%, is extremely high. As I said, science has done its job and the medical professionals have done theirs. The Government now needs to do its job. The fact is that the lack of capacity within our health service leaves us vulnerable still. It means there is a panic right across society when infection levels, hospitalisations and ICU admissions rise. That is all down to capacity.I put it to the Taoiseach that the Government did not make additional provision for as much as one new inpatient bed in the budget. That is a fact. Provision was made for 19 new ICU beds, but that is a drop in the ocean. Everybody knows that at the heart of our dilemma, with a highly vaccinated population and people doing their best and being very thoughtful and cautious, we are still left with this huge vulnerability in terms of healthcare and hospital capacity. The professionals are telling the Taoiseach this. He knows this; it is not just me saying it.I want to know how the Government will address that, how we will get through the winter----------and how hospital capacity will be supplemented.You are just playing with numbers.Are you are saying we have enough?No, it has not. You are playing with the numbers.Hospital beds are the issue."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	debate	2021-10-19	---	2	I add my voice and that of Sinn Féin in sympathy to the family of David Amess. As his family no doubt grieve a very traumatic and sudden loss, I too hope that the well wishes and regards from this House, but also from right across the world, bring them some small comfort. To his wife Julia, his children and their wider family we send our sincere condolences. The job of public service and public representation is all about people. It is about being up close and sometimes very personal with people and so his loss sends a shock wave through not just the British system but internationally. For all of us who are proud to be elected and represent our citizens, we share in the shock of the constituents of Southend West, David's constituency, who I have no doubt are equally traumatised, shocked and saddened by his loss. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-10-13	---	1	One in five families across the State lives in rented accommodation and one quarter of all households in Dublin rent. Renters are working single people and couples, some desperately trying to save for a deposit. They are separated and divorced people, in some instances, who have lost their family home. They are families recovering from mortgage distress. Renters are students forced to choose between sky-high rents and a crippling commute. They are modest-income earners approaching retirement who never had a chance to buy their own home and who now look nervously to the future. They are 300,000 households and 750,000 people. That is who renters are.Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have been in government together for five years, first in confidence and supply and now in their coalition Government. During that time, the cost of renting has spiralled out of control. Average rents now stand at €1,352 State wide and €1,848 in Dublin. Today, an average-income worker renting in Dublin pays more than €22,000 a year in rent - more than half their take-home pay. Renters, of course, still have to put food on the table, provide for their children and face the massive gas and electricity bills. As things stand, those who wish to get a deposit together do not stand a chance of doing so. They are locked into what can only be described as a nightmare.It took a pandemic for the Government to introduce emergency protections for renters, but since the Taoiseach has been in office, all these protections have been stripped away by his Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O'Brien. The result is that rents have started to spiral out of control yet again. The long-promised supply of affordable cost-rental accommodation has not materialised. However, the Government's tax breaks for vulture funds continue. This means they can still gobble up apartments, for which they charge extortionate rents to the tenants concerned.To top it all, the Government announced a budget yesterday that did nothing for renters. Why is this? Not a single measure in budget 2022 will alleviate the financial pressures faced by renters. There was no move to cut rents or ban rent increases, no measures to improve standards or security of tenure. The Tánaiste has stated one person's rent is another person's income. While this budget does nothing for struggling renters, it made damn sure big landlords still get their income, given that the only private rented sector measure in the Government's budget is an extension of a tax break for landlords.Tá sé go hiomlán scannalach nach raibh aon rud sa bhuiséad do chíosaithe atá ag streachailt. Tá cíosanna imithe ó smacht ar fad agus tá na cíosaithe croíbhriste leis an gcostas maireachtála atá ag ardú, ach ní raibh dada ann dóibh.Why has the Taoiseach's Government refused to show up for renters, people who are facing extortionate rents? When will it cut rents, ban rent increases and provide tenants and renters with the security and affordability they so desperately need and so rightly deserve?Of course, the truth matters. The truth is not alone did Fianna Fáil support Fine Gael in government through confidence and supply but the Taoiseach came into this House and bragged on more than one occasion that he had secured what he described at the time as a housing budget. That was his claim, his brag at the time.Consistency also matters and so does this. I have asked the Taoiseach questions he knows are directed towards those in the private rented sector. I do not doubt that the Government will ratchet up money into HAP and RAS, commensurate with its failure to deliver social and affordable housing; that is a long-established pattern. On behalf of those who face rents of more than €1,300 or €1,800 a month, whom the Government has left high and dry, I want an explanation.I want to know when the Government will finally act and do the right thing. The right thing is to give relief to renters, as we have proposed. Our proposal is to put a month's rental income back in their pockets and to ban rent increases for three years. I want an explanation for those people from the Taoiseach as to why he has failed to show up for them again and failed to take these actions.I know. They are trapped people.You have not-----
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-09-29	---	1	I welcome the fact there will be an opportunity to hear from the Minister for Health on the issue of the horrific turn of events at the maternity hospital in Cork.In October 2018, the then Government announced an affordable housing fund worth €310 million to deliver 6,200 homes to rent or buy over a three-year period. In the Taoiseach's budget day speech at the time, he claimed this fund was a result of Fianna Fáil influence over the then Government. Will he also claim the fact the plan was an absolute failure? Zero affordable homes to rent or buy were delivered in 2019 or 2020. In response to a parliamentary question tabled by my colleague, Deputy Ó Broin, the Minister, Deputy O'Brien, has confirmed that only eight affordable homes to purchase will be delivered by this Government by the end of 2021. The Minister, who believes the property market is not out of control, will only have delivered eight genuinely affordable homes to buy this year. Is it any wonder we have a housing crisis? Níor chuir an tAire ar fáil ach ocht dteach inacmhainne sa bhliain seo. Is scannal é seo agus tá sé maslach dóibh siúd atá sáinnithe sa ghéarchéim tithíochta seo. Taispeánann sé go bhfuil an Rialtas ag teip ar thithíocht.The Taoiseach has now been in government for 15 months. The fund to which I refer was in place before he took office. He has stated many times that housing will be his priority. He has stated he wants to give working people a chance to own their own homes. Is he seriously telling me this can actually be achieved by him when his Government will deliver only eight affordable homes to buy this year?It seems that Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael refuse to change. They simply recycle failed policies, the policies that got us into this mess in the first place. We see that in the plan of the Minister, Deputy O'Brien. It caters for the interests of big developers, large landowners and institutional investors first and foremost and not those in housing need. The Government will not invest enough money in delivering affordable homes through councils and approved housing bodies because those would be homes that people could actually buy. For the Taoiseach, it seems housing is all about the profits of the private sector and Government initiatives that are about lining the pockets of developers. He continues down that road relentlessly. He knows full well that so many people are stuck paying massive rents, forking out as much as €2,000 a month. I do not know how you put together a deposit for a house while paying that kind of rent. Now, through this parliamentary question, it has been confirmed that only eight genuinely affordable homes will be delivered this year. That is a slap in the face to every person who is in housing need throughout the State.Does the Taoiseach accept that this scheme has been an utter failure? Can he explain how it is that the Government will only deliver eight affordable homes this year?The Taoiseach is big on numbers and targets but very low on delivery. That is the reality. He cannot spoof his way out of this one because I have a reply from his Minister, dated 21 September, which makes it clear that the sum total of eight affordable homes for purchase will be delivered by the end of this year - eight - at a time-----The Taoiseach knew that. It is not a surprise to him.I have to tell him it is a surprise to people----------who are looking to put a roof over their heads.We have a housing emergency. The Taoiseach has said that housing policy will be front and centre and that he understands the depths of this emergency, when he clearly does not. He sat there in a state of self-satisfaction when no more than eight affordable homes will be delivered by the end of this year. I think that is scandalous. He ought to be ashamed that this is his record in government. Can he explain to people who wish to put an affordable roof over their heads----------how it is that only eight homes will be delivered by the end of this year? People deserve a full explanation and accountability for that.Of eight houses.Not 16,000, but eight.A Cheann Comhairle, can I enquire and ask for your guidance, as Cathaoirleach in this House? The objective of this session is that questions are put to the Taoiseach and the Taoiseach attempts, to the best of his ability, however limited that might be----------to answer the questions.I do not believe that it----------ought to be for the Head of Government----------to go off on a diversion-----I will resume my seat. What brings this House into disrepute is that kind of blather that we have had to listen to----------with no answers to very important questions.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-09-29	---	2	When a government is elected, there is a basic expectation it will cover the basics and get them right. That includes putting roofs over people's heads, ensuring access to healthcare and, of course, keeping the lights on. It is now apparent the Government fails, even on these most basic of tasks of any government. I heard from his responses earlier today that he clearly does not appreciate how anxious people are in regard to rocketing energy costs and the threat of power cuts this winter. I find it extraordinary that he is prepared to leave households in the dark in order that he can roll out the red carpet for data centres, yet this is his proposed course of action.The Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan's, attempts to reassure people this morning, if that is what he was at, fell flat. On the basis of pure common sense, given that we are where we are, why will the Taoiseach not introduce a moratorium on the development of new data centres, at least until a proper impact assessment has been carried out?I see.Thank you.I thank the Taoiseach for mansplaining the importance of a public policy issue to a mere woman like me. You are very good, Micheál. Go raibh maith agat.I am really concentrating to understand the Taoiseach's answer. I hope I can do it.Oh, is it not?Okay. If you say so.Political insults seem to be the Taoiseach's preferred mode.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-09-28	---	1	"Hospital waiting lists have spiralled out of control. We have more than 900,000 people waiting for vital medical care as we speak. I want to focus on just one of the very alarming aspects of this crisis and that is the more than 100,000 children who today go without the treatment they need. I am talking about children in need of a disability diagnosis, an autism assessment or access to mental health services; I am talking about children who desperately need early intervention but yet face a two-year wait and cannot get access to therapies; and I am also talking about children with scoliosis, who lives their days and nights in agony, waiting for a life-changing procedure. There should not be one child or family left in such an awful situation, let alone thousands upon thousands.Yesterday, we heard what the lack of capacity in our health service actually means for children. Speaking on radio, Dr. Gabrielle Colleran summed up just how dire things have become. She said: ""I had another doctor write to me last week saying they have a child with neurological symptoms and the appointment they had been offered was for 2035."" That is 14 years away, a wait so long that the child will no longer be a child when the appointment comes around. The human toll of all of this is devastating. I personally know of parents of children who miss school regularly because of chronic pain, children so traumatised by their wait that they are on anti-depressants, and children and parents who see no light at the end of the tunnel. At the root of this, of course, is decades of bad Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael policy - 40 years of pushing private interests, weakening public healthcare, slashing capacity in our hospitals and creating nightmarish working conditions for nurses and doctors. We see this failed agenda again in the problems that have arisen with the delivery of Sláintecare, in the Taoiseach's failure to fill on a permanent basis 720 vital consultant positions and in the fact that so many of our young nurses and midwives do not see their future here. The problem is that the Government is wedded to a two-tier system that has failed people time and again, and that is why we continue to have a system that does not work for everyone. It certainly is not working for those 100,000 children.Teastaíonn athrú uainn. Tá Rialtas ag teastáil uainn a thógfaidh seirbhís sláinte a oibreoidh do gach duine. Tá gníomh práinneach ag teastáil chun dul i ngleic le líon ollmhór na bpáistí atá ar liostaí feithimh. This has to change. We need a Government that will build a health service that will work for everyone. Urgent action is needed to tackle the colossal number of children on waiting lists. There can be no plámásing or hiding behind alibis of complexity. The Taoiseach's job is to do right by these kids. There are things he could start today that would make a difference. I have two specific asks. Will he commit to filling those 720 consultant positions urgently and on a permanent basis? Will he target that investment to the areas that most affect children, such as orthopaedics, ear, nose and throat medicine, ENT, and neurology? Will he invest to increase dramatically diagnostic capacity to the level required to get children off these waiting lists and into care?Níl rudaí ag athrú. Tá an córas sláinte faoi bhrú agus tá 100,000 páiste ar liostaí feithimh. Is é seo an fhírinne. They are the facts. There are 100,000 children on these waiting lists. The Taoiseach speaks of the additional €1.2 billion that has been committed but one third of that money has not even been spent. I asked him specifically about those consultant posts that need to be filled on a permanent basis. I also asked him specifically about increasing diagnostic capacity. Saying ""mar dhea"" or that there is not a problem or that the Government has risen to the challenge simply does not tally with the facts. By the way, this is not a Covid overhang. The facts tell us that, in January 2020, long before we heard of Covid on our island, there were 824,000 people on waiting lists. This is a long-running problem and at the heart of it is capacity. It is about staffing, beds, theatre space and diagnostics. I challenge the Taoiseach again and ask him to give reassurance to those children and families that the resources will be invested and that, when the Government's plan is produced, it will not fall short again.There were to be 15,000.We are not problematic about this. This side of the House supports public medicine.It is Leaders' Questions."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-09-15	---	1	I thank the Ceann Comhairle. It is great to be back in our natural habitat. Cuirim fáilte ar ais roimh gach duine.This evening we will debate a motion of confidence in the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Deputy Coveney, over his handling of the appointment of Katherine Zappone as a special envoy, but for now I want to raise a very concerning aspect of this controversy, that is, the Minister's admission that he deleted texts between himself and the Tánaiste, Deputy Varadkar, regarding the appointment. He deleted these texts and failed to send the communications to his Department for filing and storage.As the Taoiseach knows, these were no ordinary texts. These were communications between two of his senior Cabinet Ministers in relation to Government Buildings. They were official Government information and communications. The Freedom of Information Act is very clear. Communications carried out on electronic devices, such as phones, or by email relating to the official function of a Minister are subject to that legislation.By way of explanation, the Minister tells us he routinely deletes texts from his phone when he considers a conversation to have concluded. It is not the prerogative of any Minister to delete official Government communications based on personal preference or judgments. The Minister, Deputy Coveney, was obliged to retain those texts under the law. That a senior Minister was so convinced that he had the right to delete Government records is extremely troubling because it goes to the heart of transparency, public interest and accountability in government. Freedom of information is in place to allow citizens to obtain information about decisions that affect their lives and our society. It is fundamental to democracy, journalism and activism, and it is critical in holding power to account. It is essential to good government.Therefore, a Minister erasing Government records in such a fashion stinks to the high heavens. It is an abuse of office, plain and simple. It is corrosive to politics and insulting to people. This behaviour was unacceptable and it has angered people, not least because it demonstrates breathtaking arrogance. Tá fearg ar dhaoine. Bhí sé seo glic agus bhí sé mealltach. Tá damáiste déanta don pholaitíocht ag an Aire, an Teachta Coveney, agus ag an Rialtas. Is ábhar an-tábhachtach é seo.This controversy raises further questions around how pervasive this behaviour is in government. This was not sloppy behaviour. It was about a Minister deliberately erasing Government records. I would like the Taoiseach to establish for us today how widespread this practice is within his Government. Who else in the Cabinet deletes texts, documents and communications in this way?What other Ministers are doing this? Has he spoken to each of his Ministers and has he asked them directly if they have deleted Government communications in this way? Will the Taoiseach tell the House what action he has taken as Head of Government over the past eight weeks to stamp out this behaviour and to guarantee it will cease?This is a substantive and serious issue. Last year the Tánaiste, Deputy Varadkar, admitted to deleting texts in respect of the leaking of a confidential Government document at the time, the GP contract. That scandal came to light on the Taoiseach’s watch and yet here we are, 12 months later, and we have a repeat of that behaviour. It is very clear to me from the Taoiseach’s answer that he has done nothing about this.I put it to the Taoiseach very directly that he has conceded the point that his Minister, Deputy Coveney, breached the law.Can the Taoiseach clarify that is in fact the case? I ask him again what he has done or what he proposes to do about that by way of sanction. I ask him again to clarify for us which other Cabinet colleagues behave in this way. Which other members of his Government are also in breach of the freedom of information stipulations, and what will he do about that? The Taoiseach, after all, is in charge.The Minister, Deputy Coveney, has breached the law; the Taoiseach has conceded as much. Who else is at this?Is the entirety of the Cabinet at this?Then what is it?Absolutely. I said that. The Taoiseach should be that person, though.So the law was not broken.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-07-14	---	1	"This morning it is being reported that the Cabinet could not agree the summer economic statement yesterday, due to disagreements in government about funding for housing in advance of budget 2022. While this is very alarming news to those of us who want to see a massive increase in the construction of family homes, it is not surprising given the track record of the Government over ten years, including Fianna Fáil's track record in propping up Fine Gael under the so-called confidence-and-supply deal, during which Fianna Fáil claimed it had secured a housing budget year after year. It did not. What it did was acquiesce to Fine Gael housing policy at every turn and it is still at it; continuing with Fine Gael's failed models of housing delivery, including long-term leasing, which represents nothing but bad value for the taxpayer.In May, it was reported that there was another disagreement at Cabinet. On that occasion, the Fine Gael leader, Deputy Varadkar, pushed back when the Taoiseach suggested the Government should make housing its number one priority. Now, it seems that his Fine Gael colleague, the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, is not content with signing off on an increase in the funding to be allocated for housing. This is incredible. The level of current funding is woefully inadequate. Anyone with an ounce of wit or any sense of the depths of the housing crisis knows that. The Taoiseach should not just take my word for it. Last month, the Economic and Social Research Institute, ESRI, called on the Government to double capital investment in public housing; to provide €4 billion annually to deliver 18,000 public houses and homes that workers and families can afford on public land. We in Sinn Féin have been telling the Government this for years. That is the scale of what is required to tackle the crisis.When in opposition, Fianna Fáil signed up to the 2018 Dáil motion from the Raise the Roof campaign. Does the Taoiseach remember that? The motion also called for a doubling of investment in public housing. During the general election in 2020 Fianna Fáil campaigned on a commitment to deliver 20,000 social and affordable homes every year for five years but once it joined Fine Gael in government, it very quickly abandoned those promises and once again fell under the shadow of Fine Gael's failed housing policies.Budget 2021 saw the same inadequate level of investment in social and affordable housing as all of the budgets before it. This year, things must change. The Government must finally listen to the advice of Sinn Féin, the ESRI and more recently the National Treasury Management Agency, NTMA, and the Society of Chartered Surveyors Ireland. The number of voices calling on the Government to do the right thing in housing grows ever wider and louder. My question is simple. Will the Taoiseach now commit to doubling capital investment in social and affordable homes to deliver at least 20,000 homes that workers and families desperately need and rightly deserve? Could he confirm that this will form part of the summer economic statement or is it a fact that his partners in government are pushing this back and preventing it from happening?No amount of personalised invective, ducking and diving or failing to answer questions can disguise the fact that this Administration, under the leadership of the Taoiseach, Deputy Micheál Martin, is failing miserably, most especially in terms of housing. The Taoiseach's response and the manner in which he bristles at the notion of being held to account as the Head of Government are nothing short of extraordinary.Let me repeat my question. Will the summer economic statement contain the resources we require to tackle the issue of affordable and social housing, which people desperately need? The programme for Government commits the Government to examining the issue of defective housing. This was to be done within its first 12 months and was in response to a report by my colleague, Deputy Ó Broin, entitled ""Safe as Houses?"", through the housing committee. This will require resourcing, as will the commitment to the people of Donegal, Mayo and beyond in respect of the mica scandal and the need for 100% redress. The media suggests----------that the working group in respect of defects is behind schedule. It was also suggested that the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage was trying to limit redress options. Is that true?Will we have the resources that we desperately need to tackle the housing crisis?A Cheann Comhairle, these are actually questions to the Head of Government.If you want to swap seats with me----------I am more than happy to do that----------but I would prefer that you answer the questions that I have put to you.No, a Cheann Comhairle. We have had-----Sorry, a Cheann Comhairle. With respect----------we have had session after session----------in which the Head of Government will not answer questions.Answer the questions that are put to you.Yes, that is right, Micheál. Well done. Good man.I appreciate that and my dispute is not with the Ceann Comhairle or anyone else on the Opposition benches----------but we have a Taoiseach who----------flatly refuses to answer questions----------and reacts in that hysterical manner when he is held to account. It is truly shocking."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-07-14	---	2	This afternoon, the British Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Brandon Lewis, will set out plans to introduce an amnesty for British soldiers who went on to the streets and gunned down innocent civilians in Derry, in Ballymurphy and beyond. This is an amnesty for state and non-state actors who acted on behalf of and in collusion with the British state. These are people who always believed they would never be held to account for their actions and that the truth behind Britain's dirty war in Ireland would remain forever hidden by the British state. It turns out they were right. This is an insult to victims and their families. It is an act of absolute bad faith on the part of the British Government. It has left victims, survivors and their families believing this is a i and that this unilateral action from the British Government means the Stormont House Agreement has been binned.Will the Taoiseach----------set out what actions he proposes to take in the face of this gross act of bad faith? Has he lifted the phone----------to Downing Street? If not, when will he?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-07-13	---	1	I extend a very warm welcome to Deputy Bacik. Fáilte mhór agus comhghairdeas. Well done on a very convincing and wonderful victory. She is now the 37th woman in the House and that is good news for all of us.Congratulations to Ivana. We all look forward very much to working with her.Last week, the Taoiseach and his Government forced through an amendment to legislation dealing with Covid-19 business supports that provided yet another tax break to investment funds and cuckoo funds. This was an incredibly bad move, representing very bad value for taxpayers' money, lowering the number of homes available to buy by ordinary workers and families, and pushing up the cost of housing for everyone. Indeed, it is a prime example of all that is wrong with the Government's housing policy and another example of how the Taoiseach, his party and his partners in government do not understand the scale of the crisis in housing.On Sunday, the  reported that the Government's plan to lease 2,400 homes this year alone will cost in the region of €1 billion over the lifetime of those leasing arrangements. What is worst of all is that, at the end of the 25-year period, the State will not own these properties, despite paying in excess of €375,000 each for them within the 25-year timeframe. We know these leasing arrangements are even more expensive, by the way, in the city of Dublin, running at almost €500,000 for each unit. Little wonder that the funds industry is delighted by the Government's latest move, which continues apace despite the Taoiseach telling the Dáil in May that this practice should cease.On the flip side of the coin, the latest figures available from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage show that the cost of building social and affordable houses is much less than these expensive leasing arrangements, coming in, on average, at approximately €240,000. It is now apparent that the Government is content to fork out well over the odds to these funds for leasing arrangements for properties that will not be in the ownership of the State at the end of the leasing arrangement. None of this makes any sense at all. In fact, it is the same mentality that has given us the disastrous deal in respect of the cost of the national children's hospital, which, as the Taoiseach knows, is running spectacularly over budget. Private interests should not be skimming super-profits off the top of building public infrastructure, yet that is what the Taoiseach is facilitating. His repeated assertion that these leasing arrangements are short term does not stack up when one considers that the arrangements will be in place for 25 years and, in the case of the 2,400 homes to which I refer, will cost the taxpayer and the State €1 billion.Can the Taoiseach confirm that cost of €1 billion? Can he confirm what I have said, namely, that at the end of the 25 years, these homes will not be owned by the State? I urge him again, as I have urged him before, to cease and desist from pursuing these failed policies and, instead, invest in the construction of social and affordable homes. What we need is not sweetheart deals for these cuckoo funds; we need a doubling of capital investment in social and affordable housing. That is what should be announced in the summer economic statement.Public land should be used for building public housing - social and affordable housing - full stop. The days of Fianna Fáil and its crony friends, the big developers, creaming off at the people’s expense should be over. I would have thought the Taoiseach would have learned that from catastrophes past but perhaps he has not. He is confirming that €1 billion will be spent and will go into the pockets of these investment funds to lease back homes that will not be owned by the State. His assertion that this measure is transitional or short-term is patently untrue, given that the lifespan of these leases is 25 years. Moreover, the Government’s focus is not on direct build.If its focus on was on direct build and the delivery of public, social and affordable housing at scale, then we would not have this point of contention or disagreement. It is Sinn Féin's view, as well as that of the ESRI and many others, that we need to double capital investment in the construction of social and affordable housing. I ask the Taoiseach to please confirm that the summer economic statement will contain a doubling of capital investment in this way. He is the Taoiseach and I would appreciate a direct answer.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-07-07	---	1	I have made the case to the Taoiseach on countless occasions that the half measures he has introduced to rein in cuckoo funds are woefully inadequate and simply will not work.Apartments, which are perfectly decent homes, are excluded from the Government's plans. This leaves ordinary workers and families, especially in Dublin but in other cities also, at the mercy of these funds that can snap up entire apartment blocks under the noses of people who wish to buy their own homes. Many others find themselves stuck in a never-ending rental trap, paying ridiculous, eye-wateringly high, unaffordable rents to these funds, which still pay no tax on their rental income. We saw this morning that another US fund, Greystar, is set to snap up 342 homes on Griffith Avenue in Dublin. It is a matter of great shame for the Government that speculators in the housing market, who are exploiting citizens in this State, can buy homes ahead of hard-working families. Not only that, these funds then charge workers and families sky-high rent and pay no tax on their rental income. None of that changes under the Government's so-called plan.It is scandalous that these tax breaks remain in place, but the decision to grant another tax break to allow and encourage these same funds to buy up homes and then lease them back to local councils, costing well above what it would cost the State to build homes, is mind-boggling. It shows complete contempt for our citizens who cannot put a roof over their heads. It is also an absolute and disgraceful waste of taxpayers' money. The Taoiseach approves of speculators and developers filling their boots while ordinary workers and families are left to one side. Again, this morning, we saw that a fund called Alpha Real Capital is snapping up houses and apartments in Finglas, Tallaght and Blanchardstown. It will lease these properties back to the State for the next 25 years. Not alone that, this fund is not finished yet because it plans to buy €500 million worth of homes to be similarly leased back to councils over the next 36 months. This evening, the Government wants to incentivise this fund, and others, to do precisely that. That is what the Government proposes to legislate for tonight with a last-minute sneaky amendment, hijacking a Bill that is supposed to deal with the extension of much-needed supports to business, simply to placate its mates in the funds industry. The Government intends to guillotine that debate. This is utterly shameful.The Taoiseach leads a Government that will not solve our problem. Its actions add to our housing crisis, make it worse and dig the hole deeper for workers, families and young people caught in this nightmare. An entire generation of people are at their wits' end, wondering if they will ever escape the rental trap and own their own home. The Government's actions do not help them one bit; it is the contrary. I ask the Taoiseach to stop this, take this disgraceful amendment off the table, ditch this plan and get back to the drawing board. Let us have a plan that will work.Níl sé seo maith go leor. Níl plean an Taoisigh ag obair. Leanfaidh na cistí ar aghaidh leis seo agus tá sé sin náireach. These investment, vulture and cuckoo funds have not been reined in; far from it. The Government facilitates their actions. Not alone does the Government allow them to snap up entire apartment blocks and houses, it incentivises them by giving them a tax break for that behaviour. Do not try to pretend this will work in favour of people caught in the rental trap, or young people or families looking to get a foot on the property ladder and put a stable roof over their heads. No, it will not. It will not at all.This is about big bucks and big funds muscling into the property market with the assistance of the Government. Meanwhile, our citizens, families and communities are left with no real chance to ever buy or own their own homes. The most despicable part of this is that, tonight, the Government will sneakily move this through, using the guillotine, with virtually no debate. It is the same old same old, the same old Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael, the same old crisis and the same suffering for people who live outside the cosy little bubble of the Taoiseach and Tánaiste.Not true.The Government is failing and failing miserably.The Government is failing miserably with its eyes wide open. It is shameful
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-07-07	---	2	Will the Taoiseach inform us what the final cost of the new national children's hospital will be? Just over €1.4 billion was the amount agreed at Cabinet but it emerged today at a joint committee that, of 900 claims in total, only a handful have been settled. It now seems inevitable that costs will overrun substantially. The committee was unable to get clarity on this point from the Department or the board. Can the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, tell us what we are looking at in terms of a project that will, it seems, deliver the most expensive hospital ever built anywhere internationally? Will he enlighten us on the date of completion? Will it be completed by December 2023 and open in the first half of 2024?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-07-06	---	1	"The disgraceful practice of so-called cuckoo funds snapping up family homes in bulk, under the noses of ordinary workers and families, is an issue we have raised with the Taoiseach in the House many times. Indeed, it is perhaps the most abhorrent aspect of our broken housing system. Of course, what is even worse is the practice of these funds snapping up those homes and then leasing them back to local authorities. That is a triple whammy. The funds get away scot-free, the taxpayer pays over the odds for social housing that we do not own, and families and young people are priced out of the market.The Taoiseach told the Dáil that this practice would cease. In fact, on 5 May, he said that no local authority should be engaged in leasing back homes from these funds. He went on to say that this message should ""go out loud and clear from Government"". That was a fairly lofty pronouncement. It is now clear that the message from Government is loud and clear and it is, in fact, a direct contradiction of what the Taoiseach said on 5 May. Tomorrow night, it is the intention of the Minister for Finance to introduce an amendment that will afford these funds another tax break to incentivise them to buy up family homes and lease them back to councils. On the one hand, the Taoiseach told the Dáil that councils should not engage in long-term leases with institutional investors, but the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O’Brien, is now actively encouraging it. This is happening on the Taoiseach's watch. One really could not make this stuff up.The result of all of this, to be clear, is that aspiring home buyers will continue to be priced out of the market by institutional investors who avail of sweetheart tax breaks gifted to them by Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael and, lest we forget, by the Labour Party in its time. If the Taoiseach really means what he said in May, he will insist that the Minister's amendment to the Finance (Covid-19 and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2021 is scrapped. He will not do that, however, because he is not serious about this and he never has been. He is content to allow these funds to rip off our citizens. He has done nothing to rein this shower in and their sweetheart tax arrangements remain . Indeed, far from sorting this mess out, the Taoiseach is, in fact, adding to it at a time when families and young people cannot put a secure roof over their heads.It is a free-for-all when it comes to apartments. In 2019 alone, 95% of apartments built were acquired by these institutions at the expense of first-time buyers. Last year, six out of every seven homes built in the city of Dublin were apartments and these funds have  to snap up all of them in bulk. The Government has surrendered our city to these vulture funds, to the detriment of ordinary workers and families. Now it is pulling another stroke and attempting another fast one by actively encouraging these funds to acquire houses and rip off the Irish taxpayer by exempting the funds from any tax hike. Is it not time now to rip up this plan and start all over again? Is it not time for the Taoiseach to be true to his word? Is it not time to have effective remedies and stop these funds from snapping up apartments and houses under the noses of families and working citizens?At a time of crisis, when so many people struggle to put a roof over their head, they deserve much more than the kind of incoherent waffle we are hearing from the Taoiseach as Head of Government. It is really quite disgraceful. I have the Minister's amendment here. It is written down, black on white, what the Government is proposing to do. It is proposing to incentivise these funds to buy up houses, lock, stock and barrel, pricing ordinary buyers out of the market because they cannot compete with these big funds. The funds will be incentivised to buy up all of these homes and then lease them back to local councils. That is what it says in the amendment.By addition, the Government has also allowed these funds to have a free hand in respect of apartment blocks.I have set out for the Taoiseach the reality that a significant proportion of new builds in this city and beyond are apartment blocks. Far from assisting those who are in the middle of this housing crisis, he is making things worse.I am asking the Taoiseach simply to be true to what he said in May, that is, that there should not be an allowance for these funds to snap up homes and lease them back to councils.I want him to be as good as his word and to call a halt to this.Does the Taoiseach propose to answer questions?Does the Taoiseach propose to answer questions during Leaders' Questions? Are there answers to our questions?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-06-30	---	1	We have seen some moments of chaos during the lifetime of the Government but yesterday was a new peak. The Taoiseach says the advice given to him by the National Public Health Emergency Team, NPHET, came as a bolt out of the blue. That advice was not to reopen indoor hospitality and that when hospitality would be reopened, to make it available to vaccinated persons only. The Taoiseach says he was caught unawares by that.That is an extraordinary situation given the Taoiseach heads the Government and it is incumbent on him to put in place plans and contingency measures in light of the very real danger posed by the Delta variant. However, the Taoiseach did not do that. Once again, he marched the hospitality sector to the top of the hill, only to march it back down again and he now pursues a plan which gives zero consideration to young people.I ask the Taoiseach to consider the situation of a 19-year-old, a 25-year-old or a 30-year-old in Ireland this morning. Many of them have held and hold the line on the front line, while working in retail and in schools and hospitals. Others have lost jobs. Many have not seen a day's work in a year and a half. Others had their time at college but they were not on campus; they were in their bedrooms. All have had their opportunities to travel severely curtailed, taken from them at that time of their lives when it is natural to wish to explore the world. Tógadh gach rud ó dhaoine óga, fágadh ar leataobh iad le linn na paindéime seo agus níl sé seo maith go leor.On top of all the pandemic disruption, consider their prospects for an affordable or a secure home. They can forget about that on the Taoiseach's watch. If they are relying on the PUP because their job disappeared, it is going to be slashed. If they find themselves on jobseeker's allowance, the message to young people is they are less deserving than people who are older than them. We now find ourselves in the summer months, after an extraordinary year and in a time when our young people deserve a break. It is perfectly legitimate for young people to want to socialise together and meet up with their friends. They were told they would have an outdoor summer and to prepare for that, and they did. They socialise outdoors and most behave themselves perfectly well. A small element, not all of whom are young people by the way, misbehaves yet all young people are then treated as a nuisance, a threat and a problem. They are told essentially to get off the streets and wait for the pubs to reopen.Yesterday, the Government told young people they can work in pubs and restaurants and serve their elders but they should forget about having a drink after work in the same establishment or a meal in the establishment next door. The Taoiseach cannot do that. The time has come to stop paying lip service to young people and to listen to them and meet their needs. I am asking the Taoiseach to give young people a chance to benefit from the reopening of our society and from the very hard work they have invested in protecting everyone else in society. In other words, I am asking the Taoiseach to treat young people fairly.So far, the Government has disregarded the obvious solutions in this regard. We have talked about antigen testing for what seems like forever, yet the Government stubbornly refuses to pursue widespread antigen testing. People now ask why Ireland is the last place in Europe where people cannot eat or drink indoors. The answer is that elsewhere antigen testing is being used. We need to get our young people vaccinated. We need to ensure people in the 60 to 69 age group get their second vaccine and that happens quickly. We still have no clarity as to when the changes to the vaccine programme, which are woefully late, will take effect. The Government is only now engaging with the hospitality industry. It is truly a mess. This must be sorted and the Government must now deliver a plan of action that is fair to the hospitality industry but also to the younger generation.The aggressive transmissibility of the Delta variant and the danger it poses were not new to the Taoiseach yesterday. The Government has known about that for a considerable time, as has NPHET. How is it that we are at lastminute.com again, with eleventh hour decision-making again? As I said, the Government is marching this sector up the hill only to march it back down, again? It is divisive to single out young people who do not have the opportunity to avail of vaccination and tell them they can work in the hospitality sector but they cannot avail of it. That is wrong and divisive.The Taoiseach asked me what should happen. The sector should be reopened, and safely. A clear plan for that should be set out. We should have a Government that is not announcing days beforehand that this will not, in fact, happen. When will young people be vaccinated? What is the timetable for that? What of antigen and PCR testing? How will the Government deploy these measures to ensure that when the sector is reopened everybody, including the young, who run these services to an enormous extent, can also avail of them? The Taoiseach should answer that. He is, after all, the Taoiseach.The Opposition has been presented with nothing.The Government does not brief people because it is chaotic.The Opposition has been presented with nothing because the Taoiseach does not agree that his Government's actions are chaotic.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-06-30	---	2	Last month, the practice of investment funds and cuckoo funds, facilitated by the Government, buying up family homes wholesale and pushing home buyers out of the market was exposed but instead of shutting down these practices in their entirety, the Government only took half measures and took no action whatsoever on apartments. We now know the Taoiseach was warned by a senior official in the Department of Finance that failure to stop these funds from buying up entire apartment complexes and exempting apartments from the tax increases would make it impossible for first-time buyers to enter the market. Yet, the Taoiseach has persisted with an approach that allows for the wholesale snapping up of apartment blocks, leaving many people in the hands of absentee corporate landlords charging extortionate rents. Why did the Taoiseach ignore the advice of these officials? Why has he taken this course of action?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-06-23	---	1	Last week, the Tánaiste, on his own behalf and presumably on behalf of the Government, made remarks that can only be described as woefully belated in respect of the new national maternity hospital. It is fair to say that we are now looking at a mess with the fingerprints of successive Governments all over it dating back to 2013, when James Reilly was Minister for Health and Children, which is more than eight years ago. Yet, to this day a situation persists where women in this State cannot get the care that they and we deserve in a world-class hospital facility.Why is it that the Government is so late in expressing concerns about ownership of the land on which the hospital is to be built and about the governance model? It cannot say that it was not told about this. The level of public concern and, indeed, anger at any involvement by the Sisters of Charity in the governance of the hospital has been very well flagged for many years, as have the very well-founded concerns regarding the ownership of the land on which this hospital is to be located and what this means for the State’s substantial investment in the new hospital. This project is six years behind schedule and costs have escalated, ballooned by more than €500 million in that time. This project could easily top the €1 billion mark. Ghosts of the children’s hospital, in financial terms, echo through this whole saga.A Sinn Féin motion was passed by the Dáil in 2017 and supported by the Taoiseach’s party, Fianna Fáil, at the time. It called for the new national maternity hospital to remain entirely within public ownership with legally guaranteed independence from all non-medical influence in its clinical operations. That remains the absolute bottom line and is not a matter of preference.It is now beyond belief that more than €40 million has been invested in respect of a site that is not in the full ownership of the State or that anyone or any Government would countenance investing hundreds of millions of euro in public moneys in infrastructure on a site that is not fully owned by the State.The Sisters of Charity say that at no stage did any Government or Minister approach them on the subject of purchasing the site in question. We also know, and they confirm, that the Department of Health did agree in principle to a convoluted process of establishing a private trust with a board not appointed by the Minister and with the State spending hundreds of millions of euro on a hospital on land that it does not own.This is a mess that goes way back to former Ministers, James Reilly and Deputies Varadkar and Harris, and it is now unfolding on the watch of the Minister, Deputy Donnelly. This needs to be urgently sorted. What does the Taoiseach propose to do on this matter? It is clear in yesterday evening’s statement that the Sisters of Charity are resisting handing over and transferring freehold of the site in question. They cite governance reasons for that. That will raise very deep concerns and suspicions as to the full bona fide independence of the hospital. Where do we go now to secure this hospital in full public ownership?It is not only in the National Maternity Hospital that facilities are suboptimal. I could bring the Taoiseach to the Rotunda Hospital Dublin and could recite for him the endless process that this hospital has endured to secure funding to carry on safe service provision. I see that the Minister is leaving the Chamber now and he is well aware of what I am talking about.I am trying to figure out what the Taoiseach means in his response because it is a case of the State funding this infrastructure and facility but it is in fact the people or the taxpayer who are funding this.The Taoiseach says he is in favour of State spend, meaning State ownership, but will he be even more explicit than that? A message today has to go to the Sisters of Charity, with the greatest of respect to them. As people who represent the citizens and taxpayers of the State, we need to say loudly and clearly that the site in question must be in the ownership of the State-----That is the beginning, the middle and the end of it. Equivocating on the point does not assist----------in the shared objective of providing those world-class services for the women and neonates the Taoiseach referred to. Will he be specific and send that message? The Sisters of Charity communicated with all of us by means of a press release. I think it appropriate that an answer is heard----------from the Head of Government as to his expectations. I thank the Ceann Comhairle.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-06-22	---	1	Last weekend brought more very bad news for workers and families struggling to buy a home. Media reports quoted a series of housing experts predicting continued housing price hikes. This echoes similar commentary from the Governor of the Central Bank last week. One economist said of our housing market that it is on fire. Another warned that house prices could reach Celtic tiger levels. A third expressed the concern that house prices could continue to rise for the next four years. All of this is, of course, an indictment of the Taoiseach and Government’s failed policies.Last Thursday during Leaders’ Questions, my colleague, Deputy Doherty, raised with the Tánaiste, Deputy Varadkar, the issue of rising house prices. By way of response the Tánaiste said that house prices are cheaper than they were 14 years ago and that, in any event, people were in a position to borrow more, in other words, to amass more debt.This approach will only increase house prices further. One has to ask has the Tánaiste learned nothing from the past ten years? Does he not understand that more credit will mean more house price inflation, more debt for workers and families and more expensive housing? Does he not understand that increased debt means greater risk of mortgage default, repossession and, in worst case circumstances, perhaps homelessness?I spoke yesterday to a family in Ringsend. There were three generations living in one home. They are by no means unique but I will talk about this family. One of the family members, a young woman aged 35 with a good job, had just moved back into her mother’s home for the fifth time. Because of the Government's failed policies, this woman and countless thousands like her feel that their lives are on hold. A whole generation has been left in the same situation. This woman and people like her do not need unsustainable levels of debt forced upon them; they simply need to put a roof over their heads. She needs a genuinely affordable home for her and her family.Does the Taoiseach agree with the Tánaiste that house prices should increase further and that workers and families should go further into debt? Does he think that is acceptable or does he accept that house prices are too high? Does he also accept that heaping even greater debt on workers and families will force prices up and will not bring them down? All of this scenario, as it unfolds again in a housing crisis, smacks very strongly of the bad old days of Fianna Fáil in power.The housing system is designed and delivered not for ordinary people, families or workers but by and for developers, and the banks too, of course, get their pound of flesh and line their pockets.Will the Taoiseach clarify where he stands? Does he stand with his Tánaiste, Deputy Varadkar, who takes the approach whereby people should simply borrow more and buy more expensive housing, or does he accept that we have a crisis and need to deliver affordable housing?Attacking Sinn Féin for a housing crisis Fianna Fáil created demonstrates just how threadbare the Taoiseach's approach is. The story I told of the woman and the family in Ringsend is not a sound bite. It is the truth. It is the reality they are living. One finds that reality throughout Dublin Bay South. The Taoiseach is on the doors and will hear it too in Sandymount, Pearse Street, Irishtown, Harold's Cross, Ranelagh and Rathgar. It is always the same and yet the Taoiseach is so out of touch with the harsh realities, he cites a shared equity scheme as evidence of his attendance to affordability matters, which is the very scheme that has been slammed and criticised by experts across the board, not just by Sinn Féin, because it is not the answer.The answer is to double capital investment and for the State to really step forward to deliver 20,000 public homes every year to meet social and affordable need. That is not just Sinn Féin's view either. The Economic and Social Research Institute, ESRI, supports that view. Yesterday, the National Treasury Management Agency, NTMA---------added its voice to this call. If the Taoiseach is serious about it, and I urge him to get serious quickly on this, can he confirm that he is up to that task?Only the Taoiseach. I attack no one else----------but his Government for its incompetence and its failure of an entire generation. Shame on him.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-06-16	---	1	I again raise the issue of renters, a group of some 300,000 renters across this State which the Taoiseach's Government is failing badly. Ten months ago, his Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage stripped renters of vital Covid-19 protections. Deputy O'Brien's first act as Minister was to pass the Residential Tenancies and Valuation Act 2020. This ended the blanket ban on rent increases, notices to quit and evictions, which had been introduced by his predecessor. This ban, which was necessary on public health grounds, led to the most dramatic drop in people losing their homes in a decade.In its place, Deputy O'Brien introduced a highly restrictive and unnecessarily cumbersome protection for a small number of renters only. If a renter had lost income due to Covid-19, was on a Covid-19-related payment, in arrears, at risk of losing his or her tenancy and had submitted a written declaration to the Residential Tenancies Board, he or she was protected from rent increase or eviction.The renter had to meet all five of those onerous tests, however, or else he or she lost all of the protections.When tenants advocacy organisations such as Threshold and those of us in opposition warned that the Minister, Deputy Darragh O'Brien's Bill was too restrictive, we were accused of scaremongering or of playing politics. Figures obtained this week by my colleague, an Teachta Ó Broin, from the Residential Tenancies Board, RTB, prove that far from scaremongering or playing politics, Threshold, the advocates and those of us in the Opposition were right. We now know that since last August, almost 4,000 tenants have received 28-day rent arrears warning letters from their landlords and that 1,100 notices to quit have been issued. Yet, only 475 tenants have submitted this written declaration to the Residential Tenancies Board to protect them from eviction. There are 300,000 registered tenancies in this State and the fact is that the so-called protections introduced by the Minister, Deputy Darragh O’Brien, apply to just 475 of them. That is 475 tenancies out of 300,000. This comes at a time, as the Taoiseach knows, when rents are sky-high and unaffordable for many workers and families. Yet, many have faced rent increases with more increases on the way as landlords roll two years of hikes into one.It is clear and the evidence demonstrates that the Minister, Deputy Darragh O’Brien's highly restrictive protections are not fit for purpose. In light of data, facts and experience, does the Taoiseach accept that the Government's policy has failed renters? Is the Taoiseach willing, as a matter of urgency, to reintroduce the blanket ban on rent increases and evictions for all renters until at least the end of this year?The Taoiseach says he does not claim my assertions but I am not making personal assertions. The figures do not lie so let me repeat them for the Taoiseach. Almost 4,000 rent arrears warning letters have been sent; over 1,000 notices to quit have been served; and just 475 renters have been protected from a total population of 300,000 registered tenancies. The Government's scheme has failed. That is the fact. The Government's job is to protect all renters who are subjected to extortionate rents and huge insecurity at the time of a massive housing emergency that we suffer and endure, not least because of the Taoiseach's previous time in office.Is the Taoiseach prepared to do what is necessary? Make no mistake but that what is necessary is the reintroduction of the blanket ban on rent increases, which the Government can do. A ban on notices to quit and evictions is also necessary, at least until the end of this year. The Government should give renters some comfort, protection and assurance that their Government acts for them and is not totally consumed by the interests of developers and landlords.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-06-16	---	2	"Yesterday, a very dangerous and provocative march by thousands of flag-bearing Israeli ultra-nationalists and pro-settlers in East Jerusalem once again caused tensions to flare. This march was undoubtedly a show of force, with chanting of anti-Palestinian slogans, some of them deeply disturbing, such as ""Death to Arabs"" and ""May your village burn"". Unsurprisingly, this led to violence once again in Gaza and Israeli airstrikes have resumed. This is very troubling because the current ceasefire must be maintained and the violence must end. Has the Government engaged with the new Israeli Administration to relay the view of this Dáil, as recently expressed, regarding illegal settlement-building in Palestine and that these actions amount to  annexation and must cease? What progress has been made on that?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-06-15	---	1	The scandal relating to defective building blocks with pyrite and mica has devastated the homes and lives of the families affected. This scandal has hit many areas across the State but it is most acute in Donegal, Mayo and Clare. This scandal is a result of the light-touch regulation and reckless practices of the Celtic tiger years. It is not the fault of the families concerned, it is the fault of those who were supposed to have their backs and who were supposed to be looking out for them. These families have been failed by the system and by the State. These people have worked hard and saved hard to buy homes for themselves and their families and to secure for themselves what everyone deserves, that is, a safe, secure roof over their head and a place to call home. Yet, through no fault of their own, they find themselves in a nightmare situation where their houses are literally crumbling around them.Meeting recently with some of those affected was a powerful and heartbreaking experience. These people are at their wits' end. They are heartbroken. What has happened to them has taken its toll on their family lives and health, including their mental health. Everything many of these families own is falling in around them. They go to bed at night wondering if their gable wall will collapse or if the chimney on their home or a neighbouring home will fall down. Despite everything they have been through, they remain strong and resolute. These are good people and they are determined to get justice. They are gathered outside this building today and they are welcome to Dublin to pursue justice. They deserve and need the support of all of us in this House, including the Taoiseach, me and every Deputy here.I promised these families we would do everything we possibly can to advance their cause for a 100% redress scheme. Sinn Féin will lay a motion calling for that support before the Dáil tonight to see that these families and homeowners are insured to get 100% redress. That is what they deserve and nothing short of it will suffice. The scheme that the Government previously put in place is not working. It is letting people down. Under that scheme, some families are expected to come up with up to €100,000 or more to contribute to fixing their homes. Who has that kind of money? It is incredibly unfair.The campaign and demand for a scheme that covers the cost of rebuilding their homes is right and just. Ba mhaith leis na teaghlaigh scéim a fheiceáil a chlúdóidh an costas a bhaineann lena a dtithe a atógáil. Bheadh sé sin ceart. Is é an t-aon réiteach cóir atá ann ná scéim sásaimh 100% a shocrú.This nightmare needs to come to an end. These families have been failed by the system and by the State and the current scheme fails them again. They cannot be left in this situation. The only fair solution, therefore, is for the Government to deliver a 100% redress scheme and to do so urgently. I ask the Taoiseach directly to give us and them a clear, unambiguous commitment that the Government will deliver a 100% redress scheme.Let us agree that something went catastrophically wrong in respect of mica and pyrite. Something went catastrophically wrong with the blocks that were used to construct these homes. Let us also agree that those responsible for these catastrophic wrongs have to be identified and held to account. I have no argument with the Taoiseach and the people of Donegal, Mayo and Clare have no argument with him on that score. He has called this is a scandal and said it is appalling. He is correct on both counts. He has said he will enter into a time-bound process to put things right. I welcome that because we need to be timely and efficient.However, what we also need to hear from the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, is that the scheme that is landed on will represent, in reality, 100% redress. The last scheme may have been introduced in good faith but the truth is that it has not worked. That scheme has left families in misery, living this nightmare day after day, night after night. That must stop.We know that the only sustainable and viable redress is 100% redress. I want to invite the Taoiseach again to clearly state that the Government will pursue and deliver, in a timely fashion, a scheme that is 100% redress.The people gathered on the streets of Dublin want to hear the Taoiseach confirm that. Can he confirm it for them, please?Will the Taoiseach answer my question?Is the Taoiseach committing to a 100% redress scheme?Is the Taoiseach guaranteeing 100% redress?Will it be 100% redress?I want to object to the Taoiseach studiously refusing to answer a very straightforward question about a 100% redress scheme. Will he please answer it?No, you have not, Taoiseach, and that is very worrying.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-06-02	---	1	"I have raised with the Taoiseach time out of number the matter of the extortionate rents that workers and families are paying. They hand over an extraordinary proportion of their hard-earned cash to landlords every month. As a result of this, an entire generation is locked out of home ownership. Let us face it: they do not stand a chance of saving for a mortgage deposit while forking out up to €2,000 in rent every month.This was the case long before Covid-19. However, the pandemic has hit generation rent hard. Many renters lost their jobs and were prevented from going to work. They have seen their incomes collapse. Many are not back at work yet. On top of colossal rents they now face the prospect of the Government cutting their income supports.Yet, the bills keep coming thick and fast. Renters are really struggling to keep their heads above water. As if this was not bad enough, tenants could be hit with a hike of up to 8% when the Government withdraws emergency protections next month. This arises because of a loophole in the disastrous rent pressure zone legislation that will allow renters who did not endure a 4% increase last year to be hit on the double with a double whammy this year. Renters are already being fleeced so any increase in these extortionate rents will literally break the backs of workers and families.I come in here every week and ask the Taoiseach to show up for struggling renters. We in Sinn Féin have made proposals that would make a real difference. We asked the Government to cut rents by putting one months' rent back into the pocket of each renter. The Government said ""No"". We asked the Government to legislate to ban rent increases for a period of three years and the Government said ""No"". We asked the Government to stop apartments being bought up by investment funds that drive up rents and the Government said ""No"". In fact everything that Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael and the Green Party do makes life easier for big landlords and investment funds and makes life so much harder for ripped-off renters.This is not only a social crisis but an economic one. The Taoiseach should know there is real concern within the business community that the lack of affordable accommodation for workers will stifle the chances of making Dublin and other cities living cities that will drive our national recovery. I have been talking to representatives of the chambers of commerce in Galway and Dublin in recent days. They reflect this strongly.This has to change fast. The Taoiseach cannot allow 8% increases in rents. In fact, he cannot allow any increase in rent. There are solutions. There are things he could do today to protect renters. The Minister, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, says he plans to bring a Bill to the Dáil in the autumn to replace the 4% increases permitted under the rent pressure zone legislation. This will be far too late for renters. This legislation needs to be fast-tracked now. The Minister needs to bring the Bill before the Dáil before the summer recess. A ban on rent increases for three years must be part of that legislation. The Taoiseach also needs to reinstate the full ban on evictions until the end of the year at least. These are the kinds of things that need to be done now to give generation rent a chance of recovery and a shot at making it.The Taoiseach says he does not accept my assertions. Which assertions?Is it my assertion that rents are extortionate or that renters are being ripped off? Is it my assertion that renters are struggling or that a whole generation is living with the fear of not making rent and losing the roofs over their heads? Is it my assertion that a whole generation is effectively locked out of any real prospect of home ownership? Are those the assertions the Taoiseach questions? Those are the facts on the ground. Perhaps the assertion that troubles him is my assertion that the Taoiseach should get the finger out and act on behalf of these struggling renters. The Government is supporting institutional investors and big private investor funds. It makes sure they are okay but it has left renters in the lurch. If that was not bad enough, many of these renters now face the real prospect of increases in rent of as much as 8%. That cannot happen. The Taoiseach needs to act now. He cannot put this on the never-never. We have given him the answer to supporting these people and families. The jig is up. People can see exactly the stance the Taoiseach has taken. Now is the moment to act for renters."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-06-02	---	2	I have repeatedly drawn the Taoiseach's attention to the rents people are paying. I put it to him today that as we emerge from the pandemic, our people face a cost-of-living crisis. Rents are soaring, people are being ripped off by greedy insurance companies and they now face multiple hikes in energy bills. To add to all of this, the Taoiseach now proposes to increase the tax on people's family homes.His Government, the same Government that allows wealthy investment and property funds to accumulate billions in profit without paying one cent in tax on their massive income from rent, and without paying capital gains tax or corporate tax, is going to squeeze ordinary homeowners on the one asset they have worked their whole life to have - their family home.Will the Taoiseach explain to us----------why the hard decisions he and his Government take are always at the expense of families and workers? Will he please explain the rationale, as we look to get back on our feet, behind----------increasing the tax on people's family homes? Could we have the justification for this action, this decision, from the Taoiseach, please?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-06-01	---	1	"Tens of thousands of people have gone back to work this month and many more will go back in the weeks ahead as restrictions are lifted. This is very good news because people need and want to be back at work. Their enthusiasm to return was demonstrated last year when 400,000 went back to work as restrictions were lifted. Workers do not want to be on the pandemic unemployment payment, PUP. They, and indeed all of us, hope such supports will be required and necessary only for the shortest possible time. The reality is that, come September, some people will still be locked out of work due to public health restrictions. Among them will be those in aviation, hospitality and events, those whose jobs depend on international travel and those in many other sectors. That is why the Taoiseach's decision to start cutting the PUP by instalments of €50 from September is premature and deeply unfair.It has always been understood that when the Government stops people from going back to their place of employment, for good public health reasons, it has a responsibility to support them. It seems now, however, that the Government has chosen to pull the rug from under the workers. I heard a woman on the radio last week who said she remained locked out of work despite the reopening. She described her experience and said that, for the first six months of lockdown, her family availed of the mortgage break and that, when that went, the family tapped into their savings. Now that money is gone, too. How on earth is it fair to say to this woman or thousands of workers like her who will not be back at work in September and may not be allowed back until next year that their supports are going to be cut? The Taoiseach is walking away from his responsibility to these workers and their families. He will cut their incomes, in effect, by one third. That is absolutely huge. It is the difference between them just getting by for the next few months and not doing so.For the vast majority, the need for the PUP will fall away naturally as sectors reopen. That is what the evidence tells us but the Taoiseach's decision to cut the PUP ensures those who remain locked out of work will be made poorer. They still have to pay their mortgages, rent, childcare fees and utility bills but they will be abandoned by the Government when they are at the end of their tether. What happened to ""We are all in this together"", as was the slogan of the Government? The Taoiseach promised no cliff edge but cliff edges mean nothing to those who are relying on every single euro. To slash payments by €50 a go is devastating when workers are prevented from working.What the Taoiseach now proposes is a mirror of the plan he wanted to introduce in January but it was the wrong approach then and it is the wrong approach now. His approach to this matter sends out a signal that the recovery he envisages is one that is unfair and leaves people behind. Let us not go down that road again. I ask the Taoiseach not to press ahead with these cuts and to ensure that full support will remain in place for those workers who are prevented from going to work for as long as they are prevented from doing so.Be that as it may, the Taoiseach will acknowledge that, come September, there will be workers who will not be returned to work and not be in a position to get back to work. The Taoiseach knows that. The economy will not be operating at full tilt by September. The Taoiseach knows that. Yet, the Government is choosing to cut the supports on which these workers and their families rely. Everybody wants to get back to work as quickly as possible. However, the State and the Government have to make provision for the section of workers who will not have returned by September or even during the course of this year, including workers in aviation, events and hospitality.It is wrong and unfair to punish those workers who cannot return to work because of a public health emergency. I again put it to the Taoiseach that the fair thing to do is for this Government to tell all workers that we want them to return to work quickly and safely but also to support them for as long as they cannot return to work because of the public health emergency. I invite the Taoiseach to do that rather than to cut the very support these people need to survive and that they will need through September. Many of them will rely on it until the end of the year.The Government will then cut it."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-05-26	---	1	"I extend my solidarity and good wishes to the two members of An Garda Síochána who were shot and injured in the course of their duties last night in Whitechapel in Blanchardstown here in Dublin. We are very conscious of the fact that members of the Garda put themselves in harm's way day in and day out to keep our communities safe. We express our appreciation for this and extend our solidarity to the two gardaí in question and to the community in Blanchardstown for which this is also a very violent ordeal.On Friday, the Taoiseach will make his announcement on the next phase of the reopening of our society and our economy. There is no doubt there is a feeling of hope and optimism as we look forward to getting back to some kind of normality. People want to get back to work and businesses want to reopen. As we head towards Friday, there are still 300,000 workers relying on the pandemic unemployment payment and a further 300,000 still depend on the wage subsidy scheme. As the Taoiseach is aware, many of these people have not seen a day’s work in more than a year. Despite the reopening, they are not sure when they will get back to work. They depend on these income supports to pay the bills, pay rent, provide for their children and put food on the table.The Taoiseach had planned to cut these supports from January but the onset of the third wave forced him to change his mind. In April, he resurrected his intention to introduce cuts from the end of June, even though thousands of workers and businesses will still be prevented from earning. As the Taoiseach is aware, the sectors affected include aviation, arts and entertainment, restaurants and pubs that do not have outdoor areas, as well as aspects of the tourism sector that cater for international visitors. In addition to the pandemic unemployment payment and the wage subsidy scheme, those receiving the short-time work support are also in a situation where their eligibility is coming to an end but they will not be back in full employment.For weeks, these workers have had a cloud of uncertainty hanging over them. The Minister, Deputy Humphreys, said the Government would give clarity regarding the future of these payments by the end of May. It is 26 May but these workers still do not know what they will face come the end of June. It is unfair to leave them with this level of stress and anxiety. Everybody wants to get back to work as soon as it is possible and safe. These workers are not looking for big bonuses or the massive pay hikes that others have seen during the crisis. They simply want fairness and an assurance from their Government that the rug will not be pulled from under them while they are still going through very difficult times.It is not good enough simply to say that there will not be a cliff edge. These workers need to know they will not face any cut. We have consistently said to the Taoiseach that so long as we have a public health emergency that prevents people from going to work or reopening their businesses they need to be supported, and I am sure the Taoiseach agrees with this. Everyone wants to get back to work but the reality is that we will still face restrictions for some time and, let us say it out loud, we are still unclear and cannot be certain about new variants in the future. It is clear that income supports should continue until the autumn at least. This makes sense.Workers and businesses have lost incomes. In his announcement on Friday, will the Taoiseach tell those in receipt of the pandemic unemployment payment and the wage subsidy scheme----------that their payments will not be cut at the end of June?I certainly reiterate the sentiments in respect of the gardaí.There have been, not just here but internationally, what the Taoiseach describes correctly as unprecedented interventions to support people in a context of an unprecedented, at least in our lifetimes, public health emergency and social emergency.What I am asking from the Taoiseach is not to reiterate the no ""cliff edge"" position. I want the Taoiseach to tell hundreds of thousands of people who are still relying on the pandemic unemployment payment, the wage subsidy scheme and the short-term work support that they will not experience a cut. I make that request to the Taoiseach in the full knowledge that workers want to get back to work and we want to get them there. We want to get business reopened and we want to do it safely. We know we will not have a complete reopening of society and the economy in each sector overnight. For those workers, can the Taoiseach assure them that there will be no cut and can he further assure them that the supports they rely on will be extended to the autumn at least?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-05-26	---	2	I want to ask the Taoiseach about the CervicalCheck tribunal. As of this month, a total of 250 claims have been made against the State by women who were damaged and injured by the CervicalCheck scandal. Court proceedings have been issued in respect of 190 claims and 31 claims have been concluded. As of 12 May, there were 160 active court cases involving women affected by this scandal and, of those, only three have been transferred to the tribunal. The 221+ support group is very critical of the tribunal, as the Taoiseach knows. It has no confidence in it and says that it has struck an iceberg. Equally, the women affected have no confidence in the Minister for Health or the process over which he presides. Given the seriousness of all this, the ordeal the women and their families have been through and the significant public concern about this matter, what is the Taoiseach going to do? This tribunal is not working. How will he intervene?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-05-19	---	1	"The Government had two options last night - to propose a meaningful plan to stop cuckoo funds snapping up family homes and pushing ordinary homebuyers out of the market or to tinker around the edges with measures that would have no real impact on the funds and not fix the problem faced by people desperately seeking to put an affordable roof over their heads. The Government made its choice, and we again see that wealthy investment funds and big developers always come out on top with Fianna Fáil.People had low expectations of what the Government would do last night, given that it has supported these funds for years, but it has defied even those low expectations. It has done the bare minimum. The proposal to pitch stamp duty at 10% is too low. These wealthy investment funds will easily absorb that additional cost across their long-term investments. Stamp duty is the only tax measure the Government has touched. Some of these funds are the largest residential landlords in the State, yet they do not pay a cent on their rental incomes. One fund, IRES, paid zero in tax on the €75 million that it generated in rents last year, yet the Government will still allow such funds to get away with that while they charge our people extortionate, eye-watering rents. It is little wonder that IRES's share price rose by 2.6% overnight following the Government's announcement.The Government has excluded homes that are not houses. Apartments have been left out. That is half of all homes built in Dublin last year and six out of seven homes in the city overall. It is open season on those. The Government has essentially waved the white flag of surrender and abandoned people in the cities and suburbs to the extortionate rents of these investor funds, not just here in Dublin, but in other places such as the Taoiseach's city of Cork. Even where the Government has introduced so-called controls, they have no retrospective effect, meaning they will not make a blind bit of difference to the 80,000 planning permissions already under way. That is another 80,000 houses that homebuyers should have been able to make a pitch for, but they will now lose out to the funds. The cuckoo funds breathed a sigh of relief last night.What the Government has proposed is a recipe for failure. The Taoiseach knows that these measures will not work because they are designed not to work. There is an acid test for the Government's proposal. First, will it reduce the rip-off rents that people pay? The answer is ""No"". Second, will it reduce house prices? The answer is ""No"". Third, will it stop investment cuckoo funds buying up family homes? The answer is ""No"". People expected their Government to step in and stop these funds in their tracks. Instead, what they got was a cop-out. The Government may try to play people who are struggling to buy a home for fools, but they will not be taken in by this.Last night, the Government had the opportunity to do the right thing, but it wasted that opportunity. I am asking it to do the right thing today. Do what will work, end all of the tax advantages for these funds, include apartments in these measures, and ensure that measures can be applied retrospectively to stop cuckoos snapping up the 80,000 homes that should and must go to ordinary homebuyers.Let me give the Taoiseach some detail and move from the general to the specific to illustrate how flawed the Government's approach is. There is a sale happening as we speak that will see the largest private rental sector portfolio ever put to the market go to sale. It is being developed by Marlet and represents 2,000 homes across six locations here in Dublin: in Harold's Cross, Howth, Dundrum and Lime Street and on the south side docks at Grand Canal. These 2,000 homes will go to private investors. The process is under way. The Government introduced nothing to ensure that young first-time buyers or other homebuyers can get access to purchasing and owning these houses. The Taoiseach says he is for homeownership, yet everything the Government does either locks people out of access to homes because of affordability or locks them into an endless cycle of extortionate rack-renting from international funds.I will repeat our positive policies and I would like answers on them.We propose to end the tax advantages to these funds. We want to ensure that apartments are included in any and all protections and make sure, crucially, that the protections can be applied retrospectively. If the Taoiseach does not do those things, then he is leaving people in the lurch.Those are the facts."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-05-18	---	1	Sinn Féin has been raising with Government the need to tackle the growing power of so-called cuckoo funds for years. We proposed measures to end the sweetheart tax deals that these funds have been gifted by Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael, but, time and again, Government has voted against these proposals.Last week, the Taoiseach came to the Dáil and expressed his shock that funds are snapping up family homes in bulk. He said that this was a new development and it was not Government policy. Of course, none of that is true because it is Government policy to attract these investment funds which it does by giving them cushy tax arrangements, which see them pay virtually no tax at all. Last weekend we learned that it is also Government policy to invest in these funds. Money that should have be used for affordable and social housing was being used to push ordinary buyers out of the market, to push up house prices and rents. Far from being shocked, the truth is the Taoiseach knew what was happening and his claim that it is not Government policy to support these funds is absolutely bogus.Ordinary working people will struggle every day to save for a deposit, they will pay extortionate rents, they will find themselves locked out of home ownership, and, all the while, these investors snap up homes from under their noses and their Government is boosting these funds with their taxes. You could not make it up.The Government knows it is faced with enormous public anger in the face of a housing emergency. Yet the measures we have heard reported in the media seem to be a case of far too little, far too late. If the Government does not set the stamp duty at a high enough rate, it will not stop these funds buying up homes ahead of first-time buyers and others. For example, the Tories in Britain set the rate at 15%. They discovered even that rate was too low and they have had to raise it again.If the Government's proposals exclude apartments, we will also have a big problem there because apartments are family homes and cannot be excluded. The reality is that half of all homes built in County Dublin last year would be exempted under the proposals speculated on in the media. Six out of seven homes in the city would be exempted.The Government cannot wave the flag of surrender and abandon whole communities to investment funds not just in Dublin city but in Poolbeg, Cherrywood, Clonburris, Cork city and beyond because this would consign an entire generation to paying extortionate rip-off rents long into the future, unable to buy their own homes as these funds increase their profits.Stamp duty needs to be increased. The Government needs to understand that these funds will spread the cost of this over their long-term investments. The Government, therefore, also needs to tax their profits. It must shut down all the sweetheart tax arrangements enjoyed by these investment funds. These deals, designed by Fine Gael and continued by this Government, need to be brought to an end. That is the only way we can ensure that this generation of workers and families will stand any chance of securing an affordable home. Will the Taoiseach outline for the Dáil and, more importantly, for those caught up in this housing nightmare what measurements his Government will now bring forward to stop these funds?The reality for the Taoiseach is that he caused this problem.He caused this crisis and he is sustaining it. The reality is that, as a consequence of his policy, these investment funds come here. Not alone do they come here and snap up family homes from under the noses of home buyers but, in fact, his Government invests in these funds to the tune of hundreds of millions of euro. His Government's policy allows these funds, some of them the biggest residential landlords in the State. I will give one example. IRES, one of the largest residential landlords in the State, turned over €75 million in income from rental. It paid no tax. Not one cent of tax was paid on that. That is the Taoiseach's policy. That is what he has brought. That has brought hardship to people across the land. I asked him about these funds specifically because this needs to get sorted out. I invite him to stop the spoofing and the posing and to commit to the following: stamp duty at 17%, corporate tax on the profits on these big funds and residential landlords----------and capital gains to apply. End the sweetheart arrangements and make absolutely sure that protection is afforded to every residential unit. Houses, apartments, duplexes----------all of them are homes and all of them need to be kept away from these vultures, these cuckoos, these funds that the Taoiseach----------has invited in to wreak havoc in the lives of our citizens.Why will the Taoiseach not answer the question?Never mind my party; you're the Taoiseach. The Taoiseach has no answers.The Taoiseach has no answers for an entire generation. There are no answers, only spoof, from the Deputy from Cork.We might expect answers. It is called Leaders' Questions. We expect answers from the Taoiseach.That is why the taxpayer pays his salary.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-05-12	---	1	"The front of this morning’s newspaper editions reminds us again of the severity of the rent crisis and of how an entire generation is locked out of affordable, secure housing. Rents have doubled in the last decade. The average rent statewide now stands at an eye-watering €1,443 per month. That is, of course, a shocking figure but will not come as a shock to those caught up in the crisis. They feel it in their pockets every day.We now have the first generation of 20- and 30-year-olds who are worse off than their parents. The rent crisis that we and they face is the result of the bad housing policies of Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael. It is happening because people who should have been able to buy their own home years ago are trapped in the private rental market. Families who should be in public housing, paying fair rents, are trapped there too. We know that wealthy investment funds, empowered by the Government's cushy tax deals, are snapping up family homes, renting them to those families at extortionate rates and all the while pushing up house prices.These are the same funds that have been buying up city apartment blocks for years and charging sky-high rents for those too. Rising rents outside Dublin will no doubt act as an incentive for these funds to buy up housing, not alone across the commuter belt, but also into our regional cities.Yesterday, I asked the Taoiseach very plainly about his plan to tackle these vulture funds. He did not answer me, however. I can only surmise that he does not have a plan and that he proposes to sit on his hands. The Taoiseach's weak response tells these funds they certainly have nothing to fear from his Government. Not only does the Taoiseach not have a plan of his own, he will also reject the plans of others. This evening, Fianna Fáil and its partners in Fine Gael will block proposals to tackle these investment funds. Government is also lining up to vote against a plan to cut rents and stop rent increases for three years. How on earth can the Taoiseach say with a straight face that his policy is not to support these investment funds? I suggest that what he must do here is not rocket science. If I were Taoiseach, I would first end the tax advantages enjoyed by these institutional investors and get them to pay their fair share of corporation tax and capital gains tax. Second, I would impose a stamp duty surcharge on the purchase of residential property by these investor funds. Third, I would introduce emergency legislation to stop these funds bulk buying residential developments. That is what the Taoiseach should do but his answer to each of those sensible, necessary proposals is ""No"", ""No"", ""No"".Is this why the Taoiseach led Fianna Fáil back into government, to allow Fine Gael to continue to call the tune on housing? This is a kick in the teeth for those robbed of the opportunity to buy a home by these funds and who in turn are being charged massive rents by them. The Taoiseach said that housing is his number one priority but we still wait for his Government to do anything meaningful that will make a difference. Almost a year into this Government, the Taoiseach remains wedded to policies that prioritise developers and investors over ordinary people. That needs to stop because housing must be affordable again.I ask the Taoiseach this evening to do the right thing. I ask him not to block the proposals that will make a difference but to support them and then to implement them.Let the House record that we are in the grip of a housing crisis, which is a social crisis and a social catastrophe for people up and down the length of this State. The Head of Government, the Taoiseach, instead of setting out what he and his Government propose to do to put a stop to the gallop of these investment funds that are deepening the crisis and causing so much hardship, reaches for bluff and bluster.Of course, builders have a role in building houses; no great prizes for the Taoiseach for figuring that out. We need a Government that is prepared to lead. We are in a crisis. Investment funds are snapping up family homes from under the noses of people who require secure accommodation. They are enabled and facilitated in that by tax arrangements over which the Government presides, and by a failure on the part of the Government to provide the very supply to which the Taoiseach refers.I do not want a blasé dismissal of my question. I want to know when the Taoiseach will legislate to ensure that this bulk buying ceases. When will he end cushy tax arrangements? When will we see action?God help us.You do realise you are the Taoiseach and the Head of Government but this is your response to the young people of this country.You are a disgrace.You are a disgrace. The young people of this country see you.Exactly Taoiseach.Yes, initiatives.A number of the Taoiseach's colleagues objected to those as well.State land for public housing, not for the Taoiseach's developer friends."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-05-12	---	2	I raised with the Taoiseach on a number of occasions the need to end restrictions in maternity hospitals for pregnant women and their partners. I am sure the Taoiseach has heard, as I have, the really heartbreaking stories from many people about the hardship this has caused. Put simply, partners are not visitors and they must have access, along with the pregnant women, for appointments, scans, labour and postnatal care.The Taoiseach has confirmed on a number of occasions that it is his view, shared by the Chief Medical Officer; the head of the HSE, Mr. Paul Reid; and the Minister for Health that there is now no reason for restrictions to be in place. Yet as we meet today, these restrictions are still a reality. I ask the Taoiseach to intervene and bring together the masters of the maternity hospitals and managers of hospitals with maternity units.This situation needs to be rectified without further delay.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-05-11	---	1	At the weekend, the Taoiseach stated that housing is the number one crisis facing young people. This morning, a report published by the Economic and Social Research Institute, ESRI, has highlighted again the crushing cost of housing, including extortionate rents, which far exceed their pre-crash heights, as well as a collapse in homeownership amongst this generation of young adults.It is not lost on these young people, their parents or their grandparents that the housing crisis was created by Fianna Fáil, which left the housing market in hock to developers and deepened by Fine Gael, which could not wait to let the vulture funds loose. The result of all of this is that those looking to put a secure and affordable roof over their heads do not stand a chance.At a time when the Government should be moving heaven and earth to do everything possible to make housing affordable again, what is the Government doing? It is still enabling and encouraging wealthy investment funds to buy up family homes with cushy tax deals. The Government claims that this is a new phenomenon or an unintended consequence but that is not true. In 2019, six out of ten new homes in Dublin were taken off the market and the vast majority were sold to the investment funds. In the past four weeks, 400 houses have been snapped up by these funds.Moreover, they are not stopping with Dublin; their plan is now to spread their wings across the State. These investment funds are now moving to Waterford, Cork, Limerick and Galway, with leading developers saying that they will be selling more than 40% of their new homes to these funds in the years ahead. It is a very daunting prospect for young people who scrimp and save and make enormous sacrifices to put themselves in the position, if they are lucky, to have a deposit to buy a home. Yet, these investment funds not only rob people of the chance to buy their own homes but also push up house prices, in some cases by as much as €80,000.All of this happens against the backdrop of the publication of the utterly discredited Affordable Housing Bill 2021 by the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, and the provision of an affordable housing plan that can make houses even more expensive. Even by the Government's standards, that is some achievement. Is it any wonder then, that the mood of a generation is one of exasperation? The Government's sweetheart tax arrangements allow these investors to lock people out of homeownership and force them into the private rental market, where these same funds then charge extortionate levels of rent. Heads, they win; tails, they win; it is a win-win for the investment funds.There are things the Government could do right now to make housing more affordable. It could double the State's capital investment in affordable and social housing. We in Sinn Féin have called for that action to be taken and the ESRI has echoed that call. The Government could cut the legs from the vulture funds by doing that. It could cut rents and put a month's rent back into the pocket of every renter through a tax refund.It could legislate to prevent any further rent increases. Above all, what it could do is legislate to end the sweetheart tax deals and remove the financial incentive and advantage accruing to these investment funds. However, it has done none of those things. The Cabinet met today. People are waiting to hear from the Government. What are its plans to stop these vulture funds?The welcome mat was laid out for these investment funds long before Covid-19 was ever heard of. The Taoiseach should not try to hide behind the pandemic as an excuse for his evident failures. The evidence of the Government's failures are everywhere to be seen. The Taoiseach recognises that we are in a crisis and it is about supply. Supply needs to be met by building public housing on public lands. The day and time of the developer, the vulture fund and the private investment fund being king must end. That is a journey the Taoiseach has yet to walk.I have asked the Taoiseach what he intends to do now about these investment funds. These funds are, as we speak, snapping up family homes under the noses of first-time buyers and other buyers seeking a secure, affordable roof over their heads. They are driving up the cost of housing by as much as €80,000 in some instances. I have asked the Taoiseach a direct question, which I will put again. The Government has sweetheart tax arrangements with these investment funds in respect of corporation tax, capital gains tax and stamp duty. When will that end? Where is the Government's plan to rein in these funds? When will we see it?I did not say that.What is the Taoiseach doing about investment funds?What is the Taoiseach doing about investment funds?Let me assure the Taoiseach, the Government is messing it up without any assistance from me.When?He does not oppose that; he enables it.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-05-05	---	1	"At the weekend, we learned that an investment fund is buying up the majority of homes in a development at Mullen Park in Maynooth. The fund, which has a ""war chest"" of €1 billion, has robbed first-time buyers of the opportunity to buy their own homes. The fund will acquire these homes and then put them up for rent at extortionate rates. Of course, investment funds buying housing in bulk is not a new phenomenon. It has been happening for a number of years. The truth is that it is Government policy to incentivise and support these private funds to buy up housing across the State. Indeed, Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have rolled out the red carpet for them with a range of sweetheart tax advantages. These funds pay no corporation tax, no capital gains tax and minimal stamp duty, and they charge some of the highest rents in the State, on which they then pay no tax.This cushy regime gives massive financial advantage to wealthy investment funds. No person trying to buy a home could possibly compete with them, be it in Maynooth or anywhere else. People scrimp and save every cent to put themselves in a position to buy a home, but just when they think they are getting closer to that goal, another Government with another bad decision pushes their dream further away. In this case, a wealthy investment fund has swooped in and bought homes from underneath the noses of families and workers.This is not happening by accident. It is the outworking of a policy designed and defended by Fianna Fáil and its partners in government, Fine Gael. Year after year, we in Sinn Féin have submitted amendments to finance Bills to close down the tax advantages that allow these funds to squeeze workers and families out of the housing market. Year after year, Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have clubbed together to stop that from happening. As recently as last November, Fine Gael, Fianna Fáil and the Green Party voted against every single one of Sinn Féin's amendments. Time and again, the Government has favoured investment funds over ordinary people.Now, the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, says that Fianna Fáil's big plan to tackle this scandal is to limit investment funds to purchasing only 70% of a housing estate. Well, woo-hoo. That gives nobody any comfort. That is outrageous. While investment funds continue to enjoy the Government's tax advantages, they will still be able to gazump ordinary people for the majority of homes for sale in any estate on any day of the week. They will be able to do that because the Government allows and encourages it.This approach is just another plank of a housing policy that is failing. The Government has produced an unambitious and anemic plan that has no understanding even of affordability. Some €450,000 for a home in Dublin is not affordable. People deserve better. We can and must make housing affordable again. We can deliver homes that working people can actually afford and we can tackle extortionate rents, but, first, the Government needs to stop lining the pockets of wealthy investors and developers. Maintaining sweetheart tax advantages for investment funds must come to an end. When will the Government take immediate action to close these tax advantages and stand with workers and families as opposed to the funds? When will it introduce legislation to stop them from buying homes in bulk?The Government is not driving construction. It has left renters in the lurch, it will not cut rents and it will not ensure that there will be no rent increases for the next three years. It has no clue about affordability. In the cloud cuckoo land that the Government inhabits, €450,000 for a house in Dublin is affordable apparently. That is not the case.Above all else, the Government's policy has consistently favoured and facilitated big developers, landlords and private investment funds. What happened in Maynooth was not an accident; it is a direct consequence of the Government's policies, which it has designed and defended. It has cut a sweetheart deal arrangement for these investment funds with no corporation tax, no capital gains tax, and only minimal stamp duty. The result is that these big wealthy funds can swoop in and gobble up those houses that workers and families should expect to be able to afford.I am not looking for a long-winded examination of this.The evidence of the Government's policies can be seen on the ground. I want the Taoiseach to tell us today-----------that the Government will end these sweetheart arrangements for these funds and get them to pay their corporation tax----------capital gains tax----------and stamp duty on those properties.Yes, it is.The Taoiseach is a disgrace.Get up the yard.Go away out of that."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-04-28	---	1	Tomorrow the Taoiseach will announce his plan for the gradual reopening of our society and economy. There is now some light at the end of the tunnel. As more vaccines come on stream, all of us hope that we can start to catch up with others and that more people will start getting back to work. For all of us, particularly for those who have not seen a day's work in over a year, a return to working life cannot come quickly enough. However, the reality as we meet today is that there are more than 400,000 workers relying on the pandemic unemployment payment, PUP, and a further 310,000 depending on the wage subsidy scheme. There are tens of thousands of workers who have not seen a day's work in over a year and many of them are wondering if they will return to work at all. There is still great uncertainty for workers, particularly in the sectors hardest hit by the pandemic. I refer to those who are prevented from going to work due to public health restrictions and for them, income supports have been absolutely vital in keeping their heads above water and just making it to the end of each week.Yesterday, at a meeting of the Oireachtas Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach, the Taoiseach failed to give a concrete assurance that income supports will not be cut during this emergency. Indeed, speaking on RTÉ on Monday, the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Michael McGrath, was equally unclear as to what those on income supports might face come the end of June. The Government's lack of clarity is causing great anxiety for those who have seen their incomes collapse through no fault of their own. They are already dealing with the stress of not knowing when they will be able to earn a living again, while also trying to keep their families safe during this pandemic. The pressure on them is immense and the least they deserve is certainty that the income supports on which they depend will not be pulled from under them.The plan to reopen the economy, which the Taoiseach will announce tomorrow, must include an absolute assurance that while public health advice prevents workers from going to work and businesses from operating, income supports will continue. I very much hope that this will be for the short term. None of us wants this to go on forever. It cannot go on forever because people need to get back to work. Now is not the time for the Taoiseach or his Government colleagues to be floating ideas about cuts or the phasing out of supports. Workers still have rents, mortgages and bills to pay and food to put on the table and many have children to provide for. The PUP has been their lifeline and any decision to cut supports would be grossly unfair. In fact, it would be devastating for these families. These are families who watched on as the Taoiseach signed off on an obscene pay hike of €81,000 for the new Secretary General of the Department of Health and as he delivered pay hikes for super junior Ministers and judges and pension hikes for former Taoisigh. There cannot be one rule for those at top and another for those struggling to get by. That is exactly what happened following the previous crash but it cannot be repeated now.We face immense challenges but they are not insurmountable. We can build a stronger, fairer Ireland but only if we have a fair recovery driven by investment, stimulus and, above all, a determination to protect the well-being of workers and families. That must start today. The Taoiseach is being cautious and careful with the reopening. I ask him to be equally cautious and careful with these families and to clarify that the supports they rely on will not be cut or phased out as long as there is a public health emergency.I do not want to play a game of semantics with the Taoiseach at this point but the reality is that sectors of the economy have been closed down because the public health advice has been that it is not safe to go to work.All of us want the economy to reopen speedily and safely. I was not putting a question to the Taoiseach in respect of the natural reduction that will accrue as people return to work and businesses reopen. I am asking for a simple statement of assurance for those workers in sectors that have not reopened, and that may not reopen in such a speedy fashion, that they will not face cuts or reductions of any sort come July.We are coming into the month of May at the weekend. In a spirit of fairness for workers and their families, it is only fair that they have clarity that for as long as they cannot go to work and certain businesses cannot reopen. On foot of the public health emergency and in line with public health advice, those workers, businesses and families should retain the full level of support that has been afforded to them. I simply want clarity and a full statement on that point today.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-04-21	---	1	I would like to raise again the issue of housing. I am very conscious that as the light at the end of the tunnel gets a little bit brighter for people, we are beginning to consider what life, and Ireland, will look like once the pandemic passes and the public emergency is over. It is very encouraging that, despite everything people have been through in the past year, they still have that sense of hope and that sense of appetite for a better and fairer Ireland.Long before the Covid emergency, people faced very many profound crises because of bad politics and bad government. Many of those crises deepened during the pandemic but the one that really stands out is the housing emergency, alongside the mental health emergency, which colleagues discussed this morning. When the Taoiseach came to office, he said that his Government would fix housing. He came to office on the back of an election campaign that was very heavily focused on the housing crisis. However, since coming to office, what we have seen is more of the same, persisting with the same kinds of developer-led policies that created the mess we have in the first place. Any claim of progress that might be made by the Government or the Taoiseach is now cruelly exposed by the shocking numbers of tents we see around the city centre of Dublin and the heart-wrenching image that we have seen of a four-year old child sitting on a crate here in the capital city eating her dinner on the side of the street. It is not the first time we have seen a child eating his or her dinner in similar circumstances.This is the sharpest edge of the bad policy and bad government that have seen house prices go up and up. Indeed, the CSO tells us that house prices in Dublin have increased by a staggering 96% in the past nine years. These are not mansions, by the way; these are modest family homes. Meanwhile, extortionate rents continue to soar. In fact, rents are so high that many first-time buyers struggle to save a deposit. How on earth could any person save for a deposit when rent is €2,000 or more a month? It is a nightmarish trap in which people find themselves caught. As a result, an entire generation is locked out of owning their own home. This generation have had to put their lives on hold and curtail their aspirations because Government continues to choose policies that make the situation worse.Perhaps the most frustrating aspect of things is that it does not have to be this way. We need to build affordable housing that people can actually afford. That means the State leading from the front. It means direct investment and it means dropping the developer-led approach that is still in evidence, for example, in the Government's shared equity scheme. We need to intervene on behalf of renters. We have to ensure that evictions remain banned for the foreseeable future. Above all, we need to ensure that rents are cut and increases in rents are banned.I ask the Taoiseach to guarantee, and to offer to work with the rest of us to ensure, that we see a cut in rents and any increase in rents banned. Rents need to be frozen.A person does not have to walk very far from here to see the scourge of homelessness in the city of Dublin. Indeed, anyone can go into any of our cities or towns throughout the country to see that this is a reality. Rents are sky-high and housing is unaffordable, especially to younger people and people on average or lower wages. The Taoiseach was in government ten years ago. When he was in government he and the Administration of the time wrecked the housing market. The then Government created a property bubble that burst and devastated the country at the time. Ten years later, we see history repeating itself. Developers are taken care of and landlords are taken care of, but younger people and people on low incomes are all left behind. Home ownership remains beyond their reach. Rents are crucifyingly high. I want to ask the Taoiseach again. Does he accept that rents are too high? Does he accept they need to come down? Will the Taoiseach build a consensus with us? Will he act to ensure that we have rents cut and that we ban rent increases? They are straight questions for the Taoiseach.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-03-31	---	1	"Friday is World Autism Awareness Day. This marks a moment when we should be focused on raising awareness of the challenges facing those on the autistic spectrum and discussing how best to support them. Instead, we find ourselves discussing again how badly the State treats and fails children with additional needs.Yesterday, we heard the harrowing story of a seven-year-old called Lexi Forde, whose parents have been told she will have to wait until 2026 for school-age support. They said they have been left crying and literally begging for services for their daughter. Lexi’s story is not unique and comes on the back of shocking revelations that the Department of Health was compiling dossiers on children with autism and their families involved in legal actions against the State. It is important to understand that the legal actions being taken were around the State’s failure to provide these children with vital supports and services. The State set out to gather information that could be used to exert pressure, damage reputations, stall and silence these families.On the very day the ""RTÉ Investigates"" programme aired, families were in front of the High Court fighting for their children’s right to a school place. The truth is that the State makes families of a loved one with special needs feel like a nuisance when they look for support. They face a closed door. The truth is that the State only gives begrudgingly and withholds services and supports begrudgingly.Those who take on the system and the State in the courts and refuse to be silenced find that the State goes on the attack and vilifies them. This is a story we know only too well. It was faced by brave people like Brigid McCole, Louise O’Keeffe and Sergeant Maurice McCabe. The fact that this malicious behaviour on the part of this State now extends to the collection of data on the families of children with autism is scandalous and shameful. Inclusion Ireland and the Disability Federation of Ireland have condemned this practice. The Ombudsman for Children has expressed deep anger at how the State treated those whom he described as some of our most vulnerable children. However, the Secretary General of the Department of Health has sought to defend these practices. He says it acted within the law and the HSE goes so far as to describe these practices as ""normal"" - its word, not mine.It is alarming that they do not get that the real scandal is that these practices were happening at all. Lawful or not, this was deeply unethical. I do not believe this Government or the State has the consent or support of citizens and taxpayers to attack families and vulnerable young people in this way.Were these practices under way when the Taoiseach was Minister for Health and Children? Will he indicate whether these practices continue today as we meet? What steps have been taken to make full disclosure to the families on whom these dossiers were compiled and kept? Can the Taoiseach answer those three very direct questions?As I said, on the very day this programme setting out these shocking revelations aired, families were before the court bringing the State to account for a failure to provide places for their children at school. Let me repeat my branding of the practice of compiling and holding files and dossiers on children with autism and their wider families by the HSE, the Department of Health or any other organ of the State for the purposes of facing off legal challenges as absolutely scandalous and shameful. It is a practice that should not be indulged in.Rather than engaging in distractions, the Taoiseach might answer the questions I put to him. I asked him whether, when he was Minister for health, this practice of compiling files and dossiers of this nature was under way? I also asked him to confirm or deny that this practice continues as we meet here today. I also him to indicate, with regard to the families on whom these dossiers and files were held, whether that has been disclosed to them at this stage.The Taoiseach relies heavily on the report that he cites. Can he confirm that this report will, in fact, be published? I thank the Ceann Comhairle for turning off my microphone.I asked three specific questions."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-03-31	---	2	I want to raise the change the Government has made to the vaccination plan, as announced yesterday evening. This is both a huge and an astonishing decision that was made without prior notice and, it seems, without any consultation with the groups of front-line workers who will be affected by it. It has come as a great shock and has caused great anger for SNAs, childcare workers, teachers, gardaí and workers in retail that the Taoiseach has now decided they should not be afforded some level of priority in recognition of the real exposure and heightened risk they face in contracting this virus. It is abundantly clear that the Government has changed tack because the system it has in place is not fit for purpose. We have seen many instances of the flaws and fault lines in the Government's approach but this is the most astonishing admission of failure on its part. More importantly, it has caused huge anxiety among those front-line workers. I do not know how the Taoiseach can defend or explain away the removal of priority from those groups. It is wrong and it will cause unnecessary anxiety and real worry and fear among those workers. I ask the Taoiseach to reverse the decision in this regard.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	debate	2021-03-24	---	1	"I acknowledge my colleague, Deputy Ó Snodaigh, for moving the Bill. The debate on the Bill has adequately reflected the really important place that Moore Street occupies in the story of our country. The years of neglect and abandonment by the State have not diminished its aura or its legacy for our people, notwithstanding the reality of the dereliction and grime and, as one Deputy described it, it being used as an outdoor lavatory from time to time.Notwithstanding that, it is a place at the very heart of our country's long struggle for independence and a republic. It is hallowed ground. Its laneways are the laneways of history. When one walks its streets, one walks in the footsteps of the brave men and women of the 1916 Rising who carried the dream of an Ireland that could be free, equal and united, a nation that cherishes equality and justice for all. That is no small thing. These are not just buildings, laneways and streets. This is where the Republic lived as the rebels of Easter week fought to break the connection between Ireland and British imperialism. It was in the Moore Street area that the very heart of that Republic beat. It then reverberated through the years that followed and across the world. Following six days of heroic resistance, the centre of our city of Dublin lay in ruins. Five of the leaders of the Provisional Government met for the last time in No. 16 Moore Street and ordered the surrender.What happened 105 years ago in the area surrounding Moore Street changed the course of our history forever. The area includes the historic terrace at Nos. 10 to 25 Moore Street, as well as the GPO, the White House, the O'Brien's Bottling Stores on Henry Place and the lanes, streets and boundaries of Moore Street, Moore Lane, Henry Place and O'Rahilly Parade. What happened in these places, the stage upon which our city fought an empire, ensured that things would never be the same again. As Yeats wrote, ""All changed, changed utterly"".The 1916 Rising brought with it a wind of history that has left its mark on every square inch of the Moore Street area. That is why the battlefield site was rightly recognised by the High Court in 2016 as a national monument. As has been said today, most countries have sites and buildings that are important to them in terms of their journeys to nationhood and freedom, revered places that stand in testimony to a people risen in the name of their independence. It is right that these places are honoured and we should honour ours too. Moore Street should be and can be a landmark of modern Irish history, a citadel of the values so poetically expressed in the Proclamation and in the Democratic Programme.Not only is the Moore Street area renowned for its place in our revolutionary history, but it is also teeming with culture and tradition. The Moore Street market has been referred to. It is Dublin's oldest food market and predates the Famine. It is a place where generations of people have come to witness and soak up Dublin heritage at its most raw and in the most everyday of ways. No trip to our nation's capital is complete without a walk among the stalls of Moore Street or without encountering the wit, banter and charm of our traders. The authentic atmosphere and unvarnished experience of the Moore Street market is special and it is an experience that we must preserve, enhance and promote as part of our city's attractions. The laneways of Moore Street echo with our past but they also chime loudly with the prospect of a vibrant future.Deputy Ó Snodaigh's Bill to revitalise the 1916 Moore Street quarter is about building an exciting future for an area that is steeped in our very proud history. We need to unite over the truth that our heritage and past are too important to be handed over to the whims of a private developer who would perhaps pave over our history with a shopping centre. The Hammerson plan should be rejected openly and outright and the listing of the buildings on Moore Street should continue. The regeneration of the area can be advanced through the development of art, music and sport, as well as establishing a permanent, outdoor Moore Street market. Such a creative and modern approach would boost tourism, footfall and jobs in an effective way. This Bill supports the approach envisaged by the Save Moore Street and 1916 relatives groups who have fought long and hard for the State to take action to preserve and revitalise the area. Indeed, it should be noted that the group's own impressive plan would see much-needed housing, retail and cultural experiences woven throughout this historic quarter. That is the right plan for this area and should be adopted and driven by the State. That plan has the potential to transform the inner city and act as a catalyst for further regeneration and enhancement.For far too long, Governments and Ministers have delayed acting and that needs to stop. At the beginning of our debate, the Minister reflected that, in his view, we were in a better place. That is true and it is not. It is true inasmuch as we now have an identifiable national monument but it is not true insofar as we still face a reluctance, hesitancy and refusal to grasp this opportunity. I want to challenge all of us, particularly those in government, to be ambitious and see the bigger picture. Easter week in 1916 was a watershed time for Dublin, Ireland and, arguably, the world. The leaders of the Rising who met for the last time at 16 Moore Street knew the importance of seizing the moment and, with this Bill, we now have the opportunity to create a vibrant 1916 historical quarter, a living museum in the heart of our city. This is our moment and I wish us to seize it. The 1916 Rising changed the course of Irish history. It is not enough for the Government simply not to oppose this legislation and then sit back and do nothing. We need active support for this legislation now. I agree that we need to work in a united fashion and a collegiate way. We need to sit down together to make this a reality. No time can be lost. We should adopt an all-Oireachtas approach and bring this Bill to life."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-03-24	---	2	"We again find ourselves at a crossroads in our long fight with Covid-19.After three months of living under level 5 restrictions - our third lockdown of this pandemic - people are understandably fed up and many of them are angry and frustrated. Thousands have not seen a day's work in a year. Many have not seen family or friends in months and small businesses are either closing or struggling to survive. It is fair to say that people have made huge sacrifices to suppress the virus following the dangerous position we found ourselves in after Christmas. However, infection rates remain very high. NPHET has warned that we are in a very ""volatile and precarious"" position. People are now anxious about the possibility of a fourth wave. They are worried about the prospect of a lost summer after months of slogging it out with this virus.We are now approaching 5 April, the date the public had hoped would bring some relief from restrictions, yet people are still waiting to hear the Government's plan as to what lies ahead. Instead of clear communication and strong leadership, what we have had throughout the crisis is mixed messages and kite-flying. To say that people are at the end of their tether is in many cases an understatement. They have seen the Government fail to do what needs to be done to get ahead of the virus, to pave a pathway for a safe reopening of society. That has left many in disbelief. I refer specifically to a stuttering vaccine roll-out, a failure to adequately ramp up testing and tracing and the  that has been given to meat factories, for example, with devastating consequences.However, I think it is the refusal to deal with international travel that stands at the top of the list. The lack of common sense in Government policy is mesmerising. The situation is that people cannot go 5 km from their home, but they have to watch as up to 10,000 people a week arrive here from abroad, many on non-essential trips, including holidays. As early as last May, public health officials were urging the Government to implement a full and proper form of mandatory quarantine. These calls were ignored and that has left us exposed. In the meantime, thousands travelled here from other countries. Ten months later, the Government has introduced a scheme that does not go far enough. The list of 33 countries is far too limited and, in any event, only two of those countries have direct flights into Ireland. We have a half-baked plan that leaves us vulnerable to importation of the virus and to further dangerous variants, the threat from which was keenly highlighted in NPHET's most recent letter to the Government last week. We need a system of real mandatory quarantine for all non-essential arrivals from all countries. That is the only approach that will get the job done. It will send a message to international travellers that now is not the time to come here.The task now must be to reopen as safely as possible, as soon as possible, and ignoring the need for a proper quarantine system jeopardises all of that.It is time to get this right.By pushing ahead-----The situation is fragile, and that fragility is undoubtedly added to by the reality of increased variants. The question that arises is how we get from under this, how we carve out a pathway where we can reopen safely and where society and the economy can remain open. It is very clear at this stage that in the absence of adequate testing and tracing, a very efficient and safe vaccination programme and the necessary protections at ports and airports, we will not be in a position to reopen in a way that is safe and can be sustained.Let me return to my question which essentially revolves around mandatory hotel quarantine for all non-essential travel. The Government has taken a half measure and half measures will not cut it. The fragility and danger of this situation have been amplified again here today.The efforts of people to get past this virus have been recorded. What we need now is the Government to do the right thing.We need a full, effective mandatory system of hotel quarantine.The Government needs to act on this swiftly."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	debate	2021-03-10	---	1	"The ""RTÉ Investigates"" programme, ""Who Am I?"" catalogued trauma and distress. While this generated some shock among the public, those who were not shocked by all of this are those who have lived their lives seeking the answer to that profoundly simply question, ""who am I?"". Those also not shocked were the State and its agencies, which have known that illegal adoption and the illegal placement and trafficking of children was an essential part of the tapestry of misery and of the brutal system to which Irish women, unmarried women, poor women, young women, vulnerable women, pregnant women, mothers and their children were subjected for generations. The scandalous abuse of women in Magdalen laundries and in mother and baby homes is matched only by the mistreatment of their babies and their children. The remains of infant children in a septic tank in Tuam, or in the clay of Sean Ross Abbey and in other institutions is screaming testimony to this.Illegal adoption was not accidental. It was not done in error. It was a calculated course of action and it was a criminal course of action. The State facilitated and colluded in robbing children of their most basic and fundamental rights. Acknowledging this reality brings us face to face with the ingrained misogyny and the cruel reactionary DNA of this State. The nature of the State is very eloquently summarised in the ministerial review just published, where the rationale for actions in the 1950s in illegal adoptions was described as, ""the desire to protect young mothers from the censure of society and its epitaph of '' who had conceived their children '' and their children from the taint associated with illegitimacy"". It should be recalled that the taint of illegitimacy was not removed from the Statute Book until 1987.The churches, the Roman Catholic Church in particular but other churches also, the religious orders and private institutions have cases to answer and must be held to account but by far the greatest burden of accountability rests with the State. The State had full knowledge of and oversaw the mass incarceration, indeed the enslavement, of women and girls. The State and its agents stood aside as babies and children were illegally adopted, placed and trafficked. To this day, the State actively frustrates and prevents the efforts of adopted people to access their records, files, stories, history and birth certificates.The State, which is yet to fully acknowledge, investigate and uncover the full story of illegal adoption, must act. This must be done. This means the establishment of a full public inquiry. It means a full and complete audit of every record. I and we are calling for this. The State is obliged to carry out this inquiry as a matter of absolute urgency. Delay is not acceptable.Neither is delay acceptable in the provision of access to birth certificates for all adopted people. This is the purpose of today's legislation brought forward by my colleague, Deputy Funchion. As is readily acknowledged, it is only to be a first step in putting things right but it is important to take that first step. The need for wider information and tracing legislation, which by the way has been promised for decades, is of course unanswerable but that does not change the need for immediate action now with regard to access to birth certificates.The Minister's position not to oppose the legislation but also not to support it is cynical and wrong. The legislation will be voted on tomorrow. I believe and hope it will be passed by the Dáil tomorrow. It must thereafter move to Committee Stage quickly without hindrance or delay. The Minister's job and the job of the Government is to work with the rest of us to ensure this then becomes law on the Statute Book without further delay. Anything short of this will simply mean more suffering for those who have suffered too much for too long all over again.Every important journey begins with a single step. The first single step for those who have been so wronged is to allow access to birth certificates for every adopted person and thereafter we must move quickly to have a full public inquiry and to have information and tracing legislation that places the rights of the adopted person at the centre and first and foremost in that law. We have the opportunity to take this first step and I ask the Minister to take that step with us."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-03-10	---	2	Last week, two things happened in the world of high finance which caused understandable public outrage. First came the announcement that the Government will again allow the payment of outrageous bonuses to elite staff at AIB, a bank bailed out by the Irish people, as the Taoiseach will recall. Then, we had the news that 16 employees at Davy, many of them senior executives, had broken the rules, broken the regulations, for personal financial gain. The toxic culture that brought this country to its knees a decade ago, it seems, is truly alive and well. People now ask themselves, correctly, are we back to the beginning. Here we go again.Let us look at the facts. This Davy scam was uncovered in 2014. It has taken six years to get to this point and still no individuals have been held to account. Those who were responsible continued to play a dominant role in the financial sector throughout those six years. Tá an Banc Ceannais ag lorg cumhachtaí breise ionas go bhféadfaidh sé déileáil leis seo le breis agus trí bliana anuas ach ní dhearna Fine Gael ná an Rialtas aon rud chun freagra a thabhairt ar na glaonna seo. The Minister promised legislation to allow senior executives to be held to account before the summer of 2019. We are two years on and still nothing. Let us face it: this recent scandal is not an isolated event. Look at the tracker mortgage issue. That impacted on 40,000 people yet nobody has been held to account.Perhaps there is little wonder at that when we consider the revolving door between the financial industry and politics, a door that just keeps on spinning, where we see Ministers of State seamlessly move from politics to jobs in high finance. One day, their job is to hold the financial industry to account and, the next day, they are in fighting the corner of that industry as lobbyists. Indeed, it is only when a record fine was issued by the Central Bank against Davy last week that things moved on a little bit. It was only public anger that brought about resignations at Davy.At the weekend, we had called on the NTMA to drop Davy as the primary dealer in Irish Government bonds, and I welcome that that has happened. However, this decision and the fine are corporate sanctions. Not a single individual from the 16 executives has been held to account. The Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, said yesterday that all those responsible have left the firm but that is not really accurate. They have left one cog in the corporate structure but they remain directors in key parts of the overarching organisation. Last week, the Taoiseach told the Dáil that the fine would impact on behaviour in the financial sector. Does he still hold that view, given the Central Bank has stated and set out how Davy frustrated its investigation at every turn? We still do not know who most of the 16 rule-breakers are. I am not asking the Taoiseach to name them but we need to know where they are now and where they work now. Do any of those involved hold positions in Government Departments or in banks in which the State has a stake? Does the Taoiseach know? Has he looked into this? Can he tell the Dáil what legal consequences those involved will face? Does he accept that they should be independently investigated?For years, the Tánaiste and the Minister for Finance have sat on legislation to hold individual financial rule-breakers to account. This has to end. Will the Taoiseach commit to enacting such legislation?Anyone who hoped that the toxic culture of greed and personal gain had been banished from financial services - from the upper echelons and the elites of financial services - had their eyes opened again last week.Davy has made it clear that this culture is alive and well. People who imagined that the culture of acquiescence in all this on the part of Fianna Fáil and successive Governments had been banished have had their eyes opened by the Taoiseach's response this afternoon. The fact is that this behaviour has been acceptable to successive Governments, which is why it has happened time and again. That is the reason there is no mechanism, as has been called for by the Central Bank, to hold senior executives to account. It appears now that it is only when there is pressure on the Taoiseach that he will concede that it is necessary. Where are these wrongdoers?Do they work in banks or in Departments? Will the Taoiseach join me in stating that Davy bringing in a third party to carry out an investigation of these matters is wholly unacceptable and insufficient and that it ought to be the Central Bank that sets the terms for such an investigation and oversees it? We need full transparency here.Jesus.We all know the facts.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-03-03	---	1	"""I am not who I am supposed to be""; ""I was robbed of the chance to meet the woman who gave birth to me""; ""I don't know who I am."" These are the voices of people affected directly by the scandal of illegal adoption in this State. Some will feature in an ""RTÉ Investigates"" documentary to be broadcast tonight. The news that the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has confirmed at least 151 illegal adoptions at the St. Patrick's Guild adoption society in Dublin is deeply upsetting. However, it has to be said it is not surprising.Successive governments have known of these scandals for decades, yet they have failed to name them or to act, despite ample documentary evidence. Indeed, campaigners have been raising these issues with successive governments since at least 2002. Over the years, the Adoption Rights Alliance has raised specific issues of illegal adoption with successive Ministers, but it was only in 2018 that we began to see some movement. This St. Patrick's Guild audit is only the tip of the iceberg. It is widely considered that thousands of children were illegally adopted, some trafficked to America or elsewhere, and that hundreds of institutions across the State were involved in these practices. Indeed, it has been reported that the Government review has found evidence of illegal adoptions in multiple organisations.We now need a transparent and inclusive investigation into Ireland's adoption system as a whole because this was yet another massive failure and abuse by the State in its treatment of women and children. It was deliberate and it was criminal. Children had their identities erased through the falsification of their birth certificates. Their most basic right was stolen - the right to know who one is and from where one came.There are people who were illegally adopted but have no idea they were adopted. Many have lived for decades unaware of their identities and without access to their records. Many will want to know who their birth parents are, but now it may be too late. This was the case for Anne O'Connor, who received a letter from Tusla in 2019 requesting a meeting with her. Anne met officials from Tusla in London, where she now lives, and was told she had been illegally adopted. She was told her parents, who had passed away, were not her birth parents, her birthday is not her birthday and she was not born where she thought she was born. These revelations rocked Anne to her very core. She said there was loss everywhere. There was something about not knowing this. She is 65 years of age. She said, ""It's too long. I wasn’t who I thought I was, but I don’t know who I am.""All adopted people are entitled to know who they are. The State needs to end the discrimination against all adopted people in accessing their personal records. This means introducing information and tracing legislation as soon as possible but, foremost, it means passing legislation that will give all adopted people a legal right to obtain a copy of their birth certificate. Tá an reachtaíocht seo foilsithe ag Sinn Féin. Tabharfar an Bille os comhair na Dála an tseachtain seo chugainn. Bhí comhrá cuiditheach ag mo chomhghleacaí, an Teachta Funchion, leis an Aire, an Teachta O’Gorman. An ngeallfaidh an Taoiseach chun tacú leis an reachtaíocht seo? Sinn Féin has published this legislation. We will bring the Bill before the Dáil next week. I am asking the Taoiseach to commit to supporting the legislation as a first step to right these wrongs.These matters are deeply traumatising and upsetting but they are not surprising. That is the point. There has been knowledge of these deliberate and criminal practices for a considerable length of time. We now need to put things to rights. There is the scandal of illegal adoption itself. There is also the scandal of the trafficking of children to America and elsewhere. There is also the ongoing scandal, to rub salt into the wound, of the State and its agencies deliberately blocking and frustrating adopted people in their attempts to access their information. Perhaps that is the biggest scandal of all and it persists to this day. We need information and tracing legislation and it must put the rights of the adopted person first, front and centre.In the meantime, Sinn Féin has legislation in respect of access to birth certificates that we will bring next week. I appeal to the Taoiseach to follow in the steps of the Minister, Deputy O'Gorman, who has been constructive on this matter and to support this legislation as an immediate and necessary first step to put things right."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	debate	2021-03-03	---	2	Bhí grá agam i gcónaí don seanfhocal “Is beatha teanga í a labhairt”. Is íomhá galánta é. Cuireann sé i gcuimhne dúinn go bhfuil an Ghaeilge beo mar theanga. Inniu, ba mhaith liom tacú leis na cainteoirí, na grúpaí agus na pobail ar fud na tíre atá ag ceiliúradh Seachtain na Gaeilge. Ba mhaith liom freisin tacú leo siúd ar fad atá ag troid do chearta teanga ar oileán na hÉireann. Déanaim comhghairdeas faoi leith le dream Dearg le Fearg as ucht an obair inspioráideach atá ar siúl aige ó Thuaidh agus iad ag troid ar son Acht na Gaeilge.Ag cruinniú den Choiste um Fhorfheidhmiú Chomhaontú Aoine an Chéasta inné, dúirt ionadaithe ó Chonradh na Gaeilge go gcaithfimid an reachtaíocht a bhaineann leis an nGaeilge ó Thuaidh a chur i bhfeidhm go práinneach. Aontaím go hiomlán leis. Tá sé an-dearfach go raibh tacaíocht ó gach páirtí a d'fhreastail ar an gcoiste do ghlao Chonradh na Gaeilge. D'aontaigh Rialtais na hÉireann, Rialtais na Breataine agus gach ceann de na cúig pháirtí ó Thuaidh aitheantas oifigiúil a thabhairt don Ghaeilge sa Tuaisceart. Ní mór dúinn go léir a chinntiú go gcuirtear i bhfeidhm é sin. Cé gur Seachtain na Gaeilge é seo, ba chóir dúinn go léir é sin a dhéanamh arís. Chuirfinn fáilte roimh thacaíocht an Taoisigh don reachtaíocht sin.Is linn go léir an teanga. Mar Rialtas agus mar cheannairí Stáit, caithfear smaointe agus pleananna móra, inspioráideacha agus uaillmhianacha a chur i gcrích. Caithfear an teanga a chosaint, a chothú agus a neartú. Bíonn lúcháir orm nuair a fheicim go bhfuil líon na nGaelscoileanna ag ardú. Caithfear tacú leis seo. Bíonn lúcháir orm nuair a fheicim líon na ndaoine atá ag freastal ar ranganna Gaeilge, ag freastal ar phop-up Gaeltachtaí ar fud na tíre agus ag glacadh páirte in imeachtaí Gaeilge. Fair play dóibh siúd ar fad atá ag eagrú na n-imeachtaí seo, ina measc Conradh na Gaeilge, cumainn Ghaeilge na n-ollscoileanna agus neart eile.Ach tá níos mó tacaíochta ón Stát de dhíth. Tá an tacaíocht sin de dhíth ar phobal na Gaeltachta, ar na scoileanna, ar na grúpaí óige agus ar na pobail. Tá sí de dhíth ar na mná tí agus na fir thí, atá fágtha gan eolas acu ar na pleananna don samhradh seo mar gheall ar Covid-19, agus ar na seirbhísí eile sna Gaeltachtaí atá ar an ngannchuid mar gheall ar dhruidim na gcoláistí. Ach tá tacaíocht de dhíth freisin ar theaghlaigh na Gaeltachta agus orthu siúd atá ag déanamh iarrachta seirbhísí Stáit a úsáid trí mheán na Gaeilge agus nach bhfuil in ann sin a dhéanamh. Tá tacaíocht de dhíth ar na gnóthaí atá ag brath ar thacaíocht ó Údarás na Gaeltachta agus muid ag fanacht ar leasuithe a bhí geallta maidir leis an údarás. Gheall Fianna Fáil le linn an olltoghcháin go mbeadh leasuithe i ndán d’Údarás na Gaeltachta. Cá bhfuil na leasuithe sin?Tá breis agus 180 leasú leagtha síos ag an Teachta Ó Snodaigh, thar ceann Shinn Féin, maidir le Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú), 2019. Impím ar an Rialtas tacú leis na leasuithe sin. Is leasuithe praiticiúla iad a bhfuil sé mar aidhm acu cearta mhuintir na Gaeltachta a neartú. Neartóidís cearta labhartha, cearta dlíthiúla agus cearta maidir le seirbhísí pobail. Tá siad tábhachtach agus uaillmhianach.Caithfidh an Teach seo scrúdú a dhéanamh ar úsáid na teanga i dTithe an Oireachtais. Tugadh tús áite don teanga sa Bhunreacht mar phríomhtheanga na tíre ach tá bac curtha sa bhealach ag Teachtaí agus iad ag iarraidh í a úsáid. Cá bhfuil aistriúcháin na mBillí ar fad? Tá an fhoireann aistriúcháin ag obair go dícheallach ach caithfear níos mó áiseanna a chur isteach sa rannóg sin. An bhfuil seirbhísí tacaíochta do Theachtaí ar fáil trí mheán na Gaeilge? Cad faoi leasuithe reachtúla i nGaeilge? Cad iad na himpleachtaí don chóras dlíthiúil? Mar sin, is beatha teanga í a labhairt ach le beatha teanga a neartú, caithfear tacú léi chomh maith.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-02-24	---	1	The lives of an entire generation have been defined by a housing crisis. It is a crisis created and worsened by bad Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael policy. For so many people, the aspiration of purchasing or owning their own home has been reduced to a distant pipe dream. For years, people have been calling out for a government that will take the housing crisis seriously and implement a plan that will once again make housing affordable for workers and families on average incomes.When the Government took power last June, it claimed it would be that Government. It said it would fix housing and introduce a plan that makes an affordable home an achievable goal for ordinary people and families. Then the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy O'Brien, spent month upon month promising an affordable housing plan. We all waited and waited, only to be extremely disappointed by what he and the Government produced and, more than that, to be very angry because the shared equity scheme that the Minister has come up with does absolutely nothing to make housing more affordable. In fact, it will achieve quite the opposite. It will prop up already unaffordable prices and make a bad situation so much worse. His policy could be described as a continuation of disastrous Fine Gael housing policy but also with strong echoes of the failed Celtic tiger policies of the Taoiseach's party, Fianna Fáil. It will have the effect of maintaining unaffordable prices and saddling working people with more unsustainable debt.I have raised this issue with the Taoiseach before. I have said to him for some time that this plan is dangerous and I have advised him that it will not work. Of course, I have not been on my own. The Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, the Economic and Social Research Institute and the Central Bank have warned and told the Taoiseach that his scheme will drive prices up. Even the Fine Gael group of councillors on Dublin City Council have begun to see sense and have come out against this scheme. It seems so far that, just as in the bad old days when the Taoiseach was last in government, his Minister seems intent on ploughing on regardless. In the middle of a housing crisis, perhaps only a Fianna Fáil Minister for housing could even think of introducing a scheme that would inflate house prices and put money straight into the pockets of developers, while bullishly ignoring warnings from senior Government officials and experts.The truth is the Taoiseach's price-inflating shared equity scheme was written and designed by property developers for property developers. When he is trying to make housing affordable, he should not allow developers to call the tune because their job is to maximise profit for themselves. The job of Government is to deliver affordable housing for ordinary citizens. However, it seems that, with Fianna Fáil back in charge of housing, property developers are back in control and ordinary people will literally pay the price for that.If the Taoiseach persists with this lame duck scheme, home ownership will remain beyond the reach of those on modest incomes. I ask the Taoiseach to scrap this scheme.Sinn Féin is for public housing and affordable housing. We are very clear on that. The evidence of the Taoiseach's housing failures is there for all to see and is very real. It is not propaganda. The suffering and anger of workers, families and younger people, in particular, who cannot afford a home is real; it is not fiction.The Government's proposed shared equity loan scheme will prop up unaffordable prices, line the pockets of developers and leave ordinary people out in the cold. That is the simple, plain fact of the matter. The Taoiseach can play whatever games he wishes but people know that housing policy has been a disaster on his watch in the past. We are watching now again while he makes more disastrous decisions in slow motion. Therefore, I ask him again to listen to the experts and to common sense, to ditch this lame duck scheme and do the right thing.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-02-24	---	2	Last week I raised with the Taoiseach the urgency of affording priority for vaccination to family carers. He told me that advice and guidance on this had been sought from the National Immunisation Advisory Committee, NIAC, by the Minister for Health. It is very disappointing and concerning that family carers are still left at the back of the queue for vaccination. Why is that the case? I am asking the Taoiseach directly if he will correct the position in this regard. Has the Government received that advice from the NIAC?What happens to those who are being cared for if family carers fall sick? I reminded the Taoiseach last week that there are some 500,000 family carers and that they save the State €20 billion annually, which is just a financial measure of the care they provide.I am not. I am asking a question. It is my job.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-02-17	---	1	"There are 500,000 family carers in this State. They provide 19 million unpaid caring hours per week and they save the State €20 billion every year. They do their work looking after vulnerable loved ones with compassion and love and their value is immeasurable. The challenges and the risks they face during the pandemic have increased dramatically.I want the Taoiseach to listen to the words of Mike Molloy who cares for his mother who suffers from Parkinson’s:I'm part of an army of hundreds of thousands of people in this country, the forgotten frontline if you like; who do what they do because of the most basic and yet the most beautiful of human emotions, Love. I am a Family Carer!We may care for different people. In my case it's my elderly mother who suffers from Parkinson's but even though the condition or vulnerability of the person we love is different, our daily lives are similar. From early morning to late at night we ensure that the person we love is well and safe.This is challenging at any time but the pandemic has made it nearly impossible. The gripping fear we have of the virus somehow managing to slip into our homes through the only few activities...grocery shopping and pharmacy deliveries, that we can and must partake in, is huge.We live largely like prisoners under some form of house arrest with people for whom the consequence of Covid can easily be serious illness or even death.Mike goes on to express the heartache and anger felt by family carers at not being given a place in the vaccine roll-out queue. He powerfully outlines the reason why this needs to happen. It is something my colleague, Deputy Cullinane, has raised with the Minister for Health on a number of occasions. The Minister, Deputy Donnelly, has announced that the vaccine allocation groups are to be reconfigured and it is absolutely essential that family carers are given their place as part of this reconfiguration.The Oireachtas Joint Committee on Health has unanimously agreed to write to the National Immunisation Advisory Committee on prioritising family carers for the vaccine because family carers are front-line health workers and deserve to be recognised as such. Carers employed by the HSE are included in the rollout and it only makes sense that family carers are given their place too.Indeed, family carers have been prioritised for vaccination, as the Taoiseach knows, in the North. It is high time that we followed suit.We have all had a tough year, but family carers have walked a particularly hard road during this pandemic. I held a meeting with hundreds of them last week and they told me that the prospect of the vaccine is the light at the end of a long and dark tunnel. They said that it was like a punch in the stomach to be told that they would have to wait to be vaccinated along with the general population. They feel their lives and the clear risks they face do not matter.Yesterday the Taoiseach referred to the Johnson & Johnson vaccine and described it as a ""game changer"". Today, I am asking for a game changer for family carers. This means ensuring they are prioritised for vaccination. I ask the Taoiseach to give family carers the certainty they need and to confirm that they will have a place on the priority list to be vaccinated.Family carers are among the forgotten people during this pandemic. We must remember they carry out the work they do with little support, and in some cases with no support from the Government. The work they do is unseen. It is hidden away in the privacy of their family homes and they do not get to clock in and out. It is a 24-7. It is a commitment undertaken day in, day out and it is done with a spirit of love and care, as I am sure family carers have told the Taoiseach. The risk they face during this pandemic is enormous. It is just unacceptable that they have been forgotten again and have been left with the general population for vaccination as and when it is possible. That is wrong. I put it to the Taoiseach that NIAC is wrong to have left family carers in that position. As Head of Government, what does the Taoiseach propose to do about this situation? Does he agree that family carers must be recognised and that they need to be given their place of priority in the roll-out of this vaccine?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-02-17	---	2	In the space of one week the Government has missed two deadlines for a decision on the leaving certificate. Will the Taoiseach acknowledge the real distress this dithering and indecision has caused for leaving certificate students and their families? Will he confirm that we will have an announcement today, that it will bring the kind of clarity leaving certificate students need and that it will afford them the level of choice required after two academic years marked by disruption? Will the Taoiseach also confirm what the plans are for the junior certificate and whether students and children will be returning to schools on 1 March? There has been speculation and rumour on this and I suspect a date has been thrown out without any real substantive planning or even public health advice, although I hope I am wrong. I hope the Taoiseach will answer me on those three matters of the leaving certificate, the junior certificate and the return to school.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-02-10	---	1	I want to read a quote to the Taoiseach:Under our proposals, people aged 65 will receive a State pension...which will be paid at the same rate as the State pension of €248 per week. This payment will not be means tested but entitlement will be based on an individual's employment record. In contrast Fine Gael will only pay those who are 65 a payment of €203 per week, which will result in an annual loss of €2,340 for this age group.Those words should sound very familiar to the Taoiseach because they are, as he knows, an official Fianna Fáil statement made by Deputy Willie O'Dea, when he was the party's spokesperson on social protection, three days before last year's general election. The Taoiseach knew at that time the strength of public feeling as regards the right to a State pension for workers when they reach the age of 65 but he seems to have forgotten that in the meantime, because his Government's announcement on the State pension on Monday was exactly what Fine Gael proposed in the course of that election 12 months ago.Only enormous public pressure has stopped the Government from raising the pension age to 67 for now, and it is not restoring the State pension (transition) payments, as it promised. The Government will continue to pay 65-year-olds what is, in effect, a jobseeker’s payment of only €203 per week, which is a loss of €45 a week, a loss, as the Taoiseach knows, of more than €2,000 a year when compared with the State pension. This cohort of workers also stands to lose out on a range of secondary benefits, including fuel allowance, as the Taoiseach well knows.In summary, the Taoiseach has adopted the Fine Gael policy, hook, line and sinker and this is a real blow for 65-year-olds, who will rely on a decent pension to get by. The lack of fairness, the lack of respect, is absolutely breath-taking, particularly in these times when people are under such enormous pressure.The Taoiseach should know that, by the age of 65, workers will have worked hard, paid their way, paid their bills, provided for their families and paid their taxes to this State. Many of those who now look for their pension entitlement at the age of 65 may have begun their working lives at the age of 14 or 15. They have more than paid their way. Many more have spent their working lives on their feet in very physical jobs in factories, on building sites and in retail. By the time they reach the age of 65, they are entitled to this because they have earned the respect and entitlement of their pension, should they wish to retire.The Taoiseach's failure in this now means that many 65-year-olds who may wish to retire will have to continue working. Many will head back to their places of work, even in these very difficult and treacherous times. I recognise there are those who would wish to work beyond the age of 65 and, of course, that right must be upheld, but it is wrong that, at the age of 65, those who wish to retire are forced out the door to work because they cannot afford to retire, because the State and the Government do not respect their working lives.This is actually very straightforward. The Taoiseach is either for the right to a State pension at the age of 65 or he is not. Will he confirm that, under his plan, 65-year-olds will be out of pocket by €45 per week? How on earth does he stand over this, particularly given his election commitments?Let me say very directly to the Taoiseach that he is in no position to make arguments to working people about the sustainability of very modest pension payments for them when, at the same time, the gold-plated pensions that the Taoiseach and his predecessors enjoy are not to be touched. There is a central hypocrisy in his approach - big pensions for the big boys and crumbs for working people. It is a mark of decency in any affluent society - in any civilised society actually - that working people have the right to retire with their pension at the age of 65 years. These are people who have worked long and hard in manual labour, retail and as carers. I could go on and on. Yet, rather than addressing that issue and leading from the front as Dublin and the sovereign Government here ought to, the Taoiseach dodges and prevaricates.I ask him again to confirm that the Government's proposal will see pensioners left out of pocket by €45 a week and more than €2,000 a year? I want him to justify that for those working people.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-02-10	---	2	The Minister for Transport, Deputy Eamon Ryan, has finally lifted his ban, or his delay, on the construction of the Coonagh to Knockalisheen distributor road in Limerick. It will now, I understand, go ahead as planned. Will the Taoiseach confirm that? The Minister's welcome U-turn follows weeks of deep anger and confusion among the local community after he cast doubt on the completion of this essential infrastructure. It is clear to me that the Government would have dumped its promise to the community of Moyross and Limerick if it were not for many people in the Moyross community. I mention especially Tracy McElligott of Moyross Residents Forum, Jason Craig, a family support worker, Adrian Power, a school completion officer, and Tiernan O'Neill, principal of Corpus Christi Primary School, Moyross. Will the Taoiseach also confirm that this will be just one of many steps to assist the community in building housing, jobs and educational opportunities?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-02-03	---	1	"Last week the Government announced its quarantine proposals for those travelling to this country. The Taoiseach described this plan as a system of mandatory quarantine. I told him at the time that it was nothing of the sort. The proposal the Taoiseach outlined was at best a form of self-isolation relying on the discretion of individuals but it certainly did not amount to a system of mandatory quarantine. It was a half-baked plan that did not go far enough in protecting our people and it certainly falls short of what we need now to assist us in the fight to achieve maximum suppression of this deadly virus.When I put this to the Taoiseach last week, he was adamant that his plan was well thought out and that the Government was in control of the situation, and he denied that this was a half-measure. I have to tell the Taoiseach that anybody watching the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, on the television last night will be disabused of any notion that the Government has any idea as to what it is doing on quarantine. It is absolutely incredible that at a time when we are at the deadliest stage of this pandemic, the Minister for Health has stated that the Government's quarantine proposal now only requires a person to stay at home and that he or she does not even have to isolate in a single room. The logic of that is that the individual can interact with members of his or her household, who then in turn may venture into the public space, meet with others and run the risk of spreading the virus.It is very alarming to see that the Government is still at sixes and sevens here, all of which underscores the fact that its quarantine proposal was not thought out at all. Indeed, the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, could not give a date for when the Government's very limited system of hotel quarantine would come into operation.It is now six weeks since the far more infectious UK variant of the virus was identified here. I put it to the Taoiseach last week that his flawed plan was not alone too limited but that it would take a long time to get up and running. Again, he dismissed my concern saying that: ""The measures on travel will not take weeks to implement; they will be implemented very quickly."" However, the Minister for Justice has now contradicted him and has made clear that it will, in fact, be weeks before the legislation is introduced.This is all incredible, not least because the issue of quarantine and international travel is not a new one and we know that the Chief Medical Officer, CMO, repeatedly raised concerns regarding international travel, concerns which were ignored by the Government except for the establishment months ago of an expert group to consider approaches to quarantine, yet here we are. What precisely was this group doing for those months? Where is the urgency and sense of purpose from the Government on this critical issue at this extraordinary time as we do battle with this virus?We were notified of 101 deaths yesterday, a historic low point for us in this crisis. We are seeing the emergence of new strains of this virus and we have a vaccination programme which is still very much in its infancy. We also know, because the CMO has said it publicly, that we still do not have the testing and tracing capacity to hunt down this virus with the kind of speed that we require. Our ICUs are under enormous pressure and again the virus is taking its toll in our nursing homes.It is for all of these reasons that we need a mandatory system of quarantine. I ask the Taoiseach to drop the half measures, to opt for this full system of mandatory quarantine and to bring the legislation to that effect to the House with all urgency.Self-isolation has always meant isolating oneself in a single room. Many people who have been very sick fought this virus while isolated in a single room. What the Taoiseach and his Government are now describing is a very loose, very sloppy and very inadequate response. It is one which relies on the discretion of the individual, but does not even ask for full self-isolation. It is suggested that a person landing in Ireland can go back to a household, mix with others and then run the real risk of spreading this virus and, potentially, new strains of it. Gardaí cannot, of course, police every bedroom or home in the country. We are not asking them to do so, and neither should the Taoiseach. Therefore, not alone is it necessary to have a system of mandatory hotel quarantine, but it is also the efficient and reasonable request to make of the authorities of this State. It is a no-brainer.I cannot understand the Taoiseach's resistance on this issue. The clearest message that can be sent to non-essential travellers to stay away is mandatory quarantine. Why in God's name is the Taoiseach resisting something which is so obviously necessary?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-02-03	---	2	The negative consequences of Brexit are now becoming readily apparent. So too is the need for the Irish protocol, which was hard won, and the necessity for those protections for the Good Friday Agreement, our all-Ireland economy and so on. Unfortunately, the misguided approach by the European Commission last Friday has now been seized on by a section of political unionism; ironically, by the same section of people who championed Brexit despite repeated warnings that Brexit would be bad and damaging for Ireland as a whole. Nonetheless, they now use this misstep by the European Commission as the basis to launch an attack on the protocol to attempt to undermine, to unravel and, they say, to have it removed. The united front that we created was successful and necessary in securing the protections for Ireland in the face of Brexit.I believe we now need calm, cool leadership and that same united front. I invite the Taoiseach to confirm that the Irish protocol and the protections for our island are permanent and firm, will not be unravelled and are not up for grabs.Disgraceful.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-01-27	---	1	I want to raise the Taoiseach's announcement yesterday of the extension of level 5 restrictions. January has proved to be the most deadly month of this pandemic and, naturally, people are anxious, fearful and worried for the future. Families have been bereaved, people are sick and people's lives are on hold. Indeed, there are many who have not seen a day's work in almost a year. Businesses are to the pin of their collar in a struggle for survival. People feel the burden of this crisis like never before and so yesterday all looked to Government to deliver a clear and concrete plan of action and to indicate that it had a handle on this crisis. Instead, we got a Government that is clearly at sixes and sevens with no idea of how to proceed beyond 5 March. We got a Government that has yet again failed to prepare, failed to consult and failed to plan. Instead of a real plan, the Government has presented half measures that do not go far enough. At the Government press conference, contradiction and confusion between Ministers was rife and clarity and certainty were in scarce supply. This absence of urgency, leadership and plain common sense has caused huge alarm for many people.One group that is particularly distressed is this year's leaving certificate students. They are under enormous pressure. They need to know what is happening now. They have made their position clear: they want fairness, choice and an alternative method of assessment alongside the option of the traditional exam. It is time for the Taoiseach and the Minister for Education to make absolutely clear that they will facilitate this choice for those students and give them the clarity they need.The biggest mess from the Government's announcement yesterday is undoubtedly its proposal on international travel. What it announced not alone goes against public health advice; it goes against common sense. It is not a system of mandatory quarantine; it is, in fact, one of voluntary self-isolation. The Government proposes to send people back to homes and other accommodation with other people who may be going to work and who will go into shops and stores and, therefore, risk the spreading of this virus. That is absolutely crazy. People were shocked by the footage on the television last night of people returning home from places like Lanzarote. That was clearly non-essential travel yet the Government's proposal places all hope in people's discretion to self-isolate.The plan is also unenforceable and, listening to representatives of An Garda Síochána this morning saying the Government has failed to consult with them, there was an echo of all the Government's previous behaviour. They are in disbelief at what has been announced. This half measure plan will not work. It will also, the Taoiseach tells us, take weeks, if not months, to implement. Overall, it leaves people on our island exposed. The right measure is a system of complete and universal mandatory hotel quarantine for travellers onto our island. That is the only thing that stands a chance of helping us achieve the maximum suppression of this virus. This, of course, has to happen as part of an all-island approach that ensures no airport and no port on this island is left without the protection we need to stop the importation of this virus and any new variant. Decisive action like that would say clearly to our people and people beyond that this Government means business when it comes to protecting our people. I ask the Taoiseach to turn away from the half measure he announced yesterday and to implement a proper quarantine regime.The Taoiseach has set out the very reason and rationale as to why half measures are not enough at this time. He is absolutely right that this virus is devastating and deadly and we have a hard road ahead of us. Most people are compliant. Some will not be but the reality is that for us to maintain maximum suppression we, of course, rely on human behaviour. One behaviour that cannot be countenanced is unnecessary international travel. That is one behaviour we need to knock on the head. The most effective way to do that and the most powerful message that can come from Government at this time is one of universal quarantine.In other words, if a person comes to any part of the island of Ireland, he or she should face a 14-day mandatory quarantine. That is what is required at this time. Astonishingly, the Government has not opted for that. It has opted for a system that relies on people's best discretion and judgment in self-isolating in their own homes. Furthermore, the Government did not even consult An Garda Síochána, which now says it fears for the health and safety of its members. This is not the way to go. This is a mistake and it is a mistake the Government should remedy now. It should recognise what is required and what has the support of the people. The people will walk those hard yards but they expect their Government to lead from the front.No, you have not.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-01-27	---	2	I return to the matter of the leaving certificate examination. Students are in a position now where it is unclear when they will return to the classroom. This year's sixth years are doubly disadvantaged because, of course, their fifth year studies were hugely disrupted last year and now they find themselves in a hugely pressurised position where their learning has been absolutely disrupted. They have made clear that they need clarity at this point. They need to know that there will be fairness at play and that they will be afforded a level of choice to sit the traditional examination if that is possible in the summertime or to have an alternative continuous-assessment grading system also. The Taoiseach is now honour bound to make clear to students that that level of choice will be granted. Any pretence now that we will have business as usual come the summer has absolutely zero credibility. These young people have really suffered and they are suffering now with the lack of clarity and with the anxiety that they are experiencing, as are their families and the teachers concerned.Can the Taoiseach may clear now that choice will be given to these leaving certificate students? Can he give them that level of reassurance and clarity today?When?It is a very sorry-----It is a very sorry state of affairs when a Head of Government finds questions asked as a rant.I would ask the Taoiseach to withdraw it.I am entitled to be treated with some level of respect.The Taoiseach is a disgrace.Not alone is the Taoiseach incompetent but he is ignorant.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-01-20	---	1	I extend my thoughts and sympathies to the families of the 93 people whose deaths from Covid-19 were reported yesterday and to all those who have been bereaved in the course of this pandemic. We are living through what are difficult times for many families.The Government has abandoned plans to reopen special education schools and facilities this week. The Minister for Education, Deputy Foley, has twice promised that they would reopen. She has twice failed to deliver. The promises have fallen apart due to Government incompetence. The Minister's approach in the media over the past 24 hours of finger pointing and seeking to scapegoat SNAs and teachers is fooling no one.Everyone wants to see children and young people with additional needs back at school. That has been and remains a shared objective because they are the cohort of students that missed out most when schools closed in the spring. The regression that was experienced by many as a result of the loss of their supports and routines was alarming. It caused incredible distress to them and their parents. Now, these children and young people are losing out again and their parents are distressed once more.The responsibility for this mess lies squarely with the Government. It told anyone who cared to listen that education during the pandemic was a priority, yet it has failed to put together anything resembling a plan B. No thought was given to how education would continue if schools had to close due to high rates of infection. Such a plan B could have been, and should have been, on the shelf, having been discussed with all stakeholders - unions, management bodies, students and parents. The Government has had since August to put in place these contingencies.By the way, special education is up and running in the North and across Europe. People are left wondering how and why it is that the same cannot happen here. The truth is that, instead of being prepared, the Government scrambled at the last minute to put together a plan. It fell apart because there had been no consultation and the Government sought to bounce stakeholders. The Government has a tendency to dictate policy by press release. We saw the Minister, Deputy Foley, and the Minister of State, Deputy Madigan, racing to gazump each other in the media. That approach has resulted in serious implications for children and young people and their families.The Minister now claims that her plan collapsed because of bad faith. Let me tell the House what bad faith is. It was bad faith to give these children, as she did, the impression that they would be back in school when the work was not done to ensure that schools were safe and all the people involved in delivering the plan were on board. All of this happened because the Minister made a big promise and has not done the work to deliver it.Children with special educational needs should be priority No. 1 in education. They should be the first back into the classroom, but that must happen on the basis of agreement and of ensuring that schools and staff are safe. The talks that I hope are ongoing today need to take some serious shape now. SNAs and teachers want to be back in school. I recall clearly how, in September, they moved heaven and earth to get their classes open again with little notice. The Taoiseach might advise the Minister of State, Deputy Madigan, that comparing these professionals - teachers, SNAs and others - to mother and baby homes is not just crass and clueless, but a vain attempt to shift blame.The truth is the outstanding concerns have to be addressed. The other truth is this cannot go on forever. We need to see a result. We cannot allow this to drift into the general reopening of schools.These children and their parents do not have the luxury of time. What we need now is a real, concrete and deliverable solution.As the Taoiseach very well knows, holding the Government to account is not playing politics. I point to the irony of a Government that itself has played politics and rushed very quickly to point fingers at SNAs, teachers and anyone bar itself for this fiasco.There is a shared objective for special education to function. The Minister says that she is committed to that, but she has twice announced its reopening and has twice failed to deliver. The consultation that happened was clearly insufficient and the Minister jumped the gun. She made the big announcement, to considerable fanfare, that services would resume, but she did not have the plan in place. She had not settled or reassured teachers and SNAs, the caring, wonderful professionals who deliver the services and support to these wonderful children and young people. The plan had not been finalised. By any calculation, that was a gross misjudgment on her part.What is worse is that after the fact, there was an attempt to lay the blame, scapegoat and be incredibly divisive among the special education community.That is not good government. Is the Taoiseach telling the Dáil that he is reassured that the Minister, Deputy Foley, and the Minister of State, Deputy Madigan, can deliver an agreed return to school and services----------and that it can be done in the short term with the agreement and the necessary, reasonable assurances that SNAs and teachers are looking for and rightly deserve?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-01-13	---	1	Cuirim fáilte roimh gach duine.Yesterday was a difficult day right across the island. There were record numbers of deaths North and South and it is only appropriate to express our sympathy to those who have been bereaved. The mother and baby homes report was also published. We will have an opportunity to discuss that report in due course today.For now, I wish to discuss the issue of housing. In Fianna Fáil's election manifesto last year, it promised 50,000 affordable homes over five years if in government. It also promised that an affordable housing scheme would deliver homes to buy for less than €250,000. When the Taoiseach appointed Deputy Darragh O'Brien as Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage in July, the Minister promised to have the scheme in place by September. Before the budget, he stated that he would publish the scheme with targets and legislation. However, the budget came and went with no affordable housing scheme launched. We were then told that the scheme would be ready in the autumn, but that deadline was also missed. At its final meeting of 2020, a memo was rushed to the Cabinet. There was no legislation, no target. The scheme has yet to be finalised. All the Cabinet agreed was that, at some point in 2021, the Government will introduce a significantly flawed and controversial shared equity loan scheme. That was not in Fianna Fáil's election manifesto. In fact, it is a policy that was drafted for the Government by the construction industry. Last March, Irish Institutional Property, which represents 14 of the biggest players in the industry, published a shared equity loan proposal. IBEC's property wing, Property Industry Ireland, published a similar proposal last May. The proposal agreed by the Cabinet was almost identical to these. Housing policy being directed by wealthy property developers and big landlords is what we have while ordinary people continue to live out the nightmare that is this housing crisis.Many young people have given up any hope of ever owning their own homes. Gone is Fianna Fáil's promise to deliver affordable homes for less than €250,000. Gone is its promise to deliver 10,000 affordable houses to buy every year. Instead, the Government is going to saddle working people with large debts so that they can buy unaffordable homes. Its scheme will offer a first-time buyer a shared equity loan of up to €100,000 on top of a mortgage to buy a home to the value of €400,000. Worse still, if the value of the home increases, so does the equity stake. This means that the buyer will owe the State even more. Shared equity loan schemes push up prices. Everyone knows that. Even officials in the Departments of the Taoiseach and Public Expenditure and Reform have advised the Government of this fact. In email correspondence dealing with the shared equity loan scheme that was released to our housing spokesperson, Deputy Ó Broin, Mr. Robert Watt is reported as saying that the property industry wanted an equity scheme because it would push up prices. He was not alone in that regard. Another official stated that the provision might not be targeted at those most in need. A third stated that it would push up prices in a supply-constrained environment.Why is the Taoiseach allowing lobbyists for the property industry to write Government housing policy? Why has he ignored the advice of his own officials? Why has he abandoned his election promise to deliver affordable homes?I am under absolutely no illusions, nor are the Taoiseach's officials, that the proposed shared equity loan scheme will have the effect of forcing up prices and saddling those young people and working families to whom he refers with even more debt. It seems clear that Fianna Fáil has learned nothing from the past and that we are back to the bad old days of developer-led housing policy in which the only people who will benefit from the Taoiseach's shared equity loan scheme are the developers. The scheme will lock in already unaffordable prices and push them up even further. Of course, developers will be laughing all the way to the bank but young people and working families will face huge levels of debt.The Taoiseach should have kept his election promise and funded local authorities to directly deliver the huge volume of genuinely affordable homes that we need. He could listen to his officials but instead he does what those in Fianna Fáil have always done, namely, listen to the big developers. What big developers want, big developers get. I ask the Taoiseach again why he has ignored the advice of his officials. Does he accept that he has been given the advice that the Government's shared equity loan scheme is dangerous and flawed and will push up prices?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-01-13	---	2	Children with special educational needs were among those who suffered most during the first lockdown. Despite the best efforts of everyone, including staff, parents and the children and young people themselves, there was regression. The disruption to routine and lack of social contact is very traumatic for them. The parents of children with special educational needs were distraught and disappointed with the Government's failure to plan for the closure of schools because that led to there being no plan for their children's education. Everybody wants to see children back at school, especially those children and young people with additional needs.That meant that the Government needed to plan and to consult with workers and all other stakeholders.Unfortunately, that was not done and it has led to big disappointment. Remote learning does not work for many children with additional needs. They need in-school support. Will the Taoiseach direct the Minister to negotiate with all stakeholders and ensure that service is delivered to these children and young people at the earliest possible date?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	52	Dublin Central	question	2021-01-13	---	3	"Tá mo chuid smaointe inniu leo siúd a chaith am i dtithe na máthar agus na leanaí. Inniu, cuimhnímid orthu go léir. Is córas drochíde agus díghrádaithe a bhí ann. Tá an Taoiseach tar éis leithscéal a ghabháil ar son an Stát, ach tá na chéad chéimeanna eile ríthábhachtach.Yesterday was a day of mixed emotions for the survivors of mother and baby homes. After five years, the report of the commission was finally published and it was a very long process from which many survivors and their advocates felt excluded and ignored. Still, there was slight hope that publication of the report would bring truth and real accountability but for many those hopes were dashed. Sadly, many survivors are upset, deflated and angered by some of what they have read in the report. The assertion that there were no forced adoptions, that there exists little evidence of physical abuse and the overarching attempt to shift responsibility from the State and churches has left survivors shocked and some outraged. They are equally furious that, still, barriers to accessing basic documentation, including birth certificates, are placed in their way by the State. This circling of the wagons only adds to their trauma and exacerbates the failures of the State.The purpose and the power of testimony is that it is given to be believed but many survivors feel that they were not heard and they were not believed. They know that they were coerced and forced to give up their children. They know that they were physically and mentally abused and whatever they read, they know that the State and churches are responsible for the violation of their most basic human rights.It is plainly untrue to suggest that the whole of Irish society is responsible. That is a distortion of history. The truth is that these crimes were perpetuated by a reactionary Catholic church and a confessional State. Those in power outsourced their responsibility to the religious orders, the churches and to Protestant churches also as we know from the accounts of survivors from places like Bethany Home. This was done by the powerful to those who were vulnerable so any idea that we did this to ourselves is deeply insulting to victims and survivors and it is, frankly, a cop-out.We know that the death rate of children born in these institutions was multiple of the infant mortality rate in Ireland at that time. Nine thousand children died in the 18 institutions covered by the report and as horrific as this is, it is but a glimpse of the true horror that would have been uncovered had the investigation received a wider remit to capture the vast network of institutions involved in the adoption system, all on the watch and with the connivance of and funded by the Irish State and successive Governments.It is crucially important that provision is made for the excavation of sites at former homes throughout the State. Many women and families know that their children and relatives are buried on the grounds but they cannot pinpoint exactly where so these mothers must be afforded the human dignity of reclaiming the remains of their children to ensure they can also claim ownership of their individual stories and experiences.Now is the time for State and church as perpetrators of these abuses to issue formal apologies and take responsibility for the horrific violations. I suggest that a good and perhaps an appropriate point for the current Administration to start is to afford the respect and dignity due to single parent families who as we know to this day remain marginalised and poor and are often regarded as the low-hanging fruit when the budgets get tight and the so-called tough decisions have to be made.There has to be full redress and compensation and the rights of survivors and adopted people to access their own information must be realised. The importance of that cannot be overstated.We would not have reached this point if it was not for the dedicated and selfless actions of countless people, survivors and advocates. Niall Meehan's work in uncovering the deaths and the mortality rate at the Bethany Home was landmark but it is to Catherine Corless that perhaps we owe the greatest debt. She uncovered the remains of 800 babies in a mass unmarked grave in Tuam.The lived experiences documented within the report amount to a devastating catalogue of heartbreak, misery and the violation of basic human rights so I want to acknowledge the Taoiseach's apology to victims and survivors today on behalf of the State. It is something that they have waited a long time to hear but it is not true to say that what was witnessed was simply a failure of empathy and compassion in Irish society, although God knows that is true.More profoundly, it was an abuse of power. It was the ultimate abuse of authority. It was brutality inflicted on women and girls, and on the poor in particular.The value of any sincere apology is always found in the actions that follow. In this, victims and survivor are crystal clear that they want meaningful action and they want to be involved in formulating the State's approach. A good starting point would be to address the fact that the work of the commission covers just 18 institutions, whereas the Clann Project submitted a list of at least 182 institutions, individuals and agencies involved in adoption, informal adoption and other forms of forced family separation. The apology today must be understood to extend to the women and children who went through all of these institutions, including county homes, children who were boarded out, often in circumstances of indentured servitude, and those who were illegally adopted. So far, successive Governments have refused to progress the detailed recommendations of the Mother and Baby Home Collaborative Forum. These, alongside the recommendations of the Clann Project, must be advanced. The Taoiseach must also deliver on his commitment to create the national archive of institutional, adoption and other care-related records while ensuring the proper implementation of EU GDPR rights by all controllers of institutional, adoption and other care-related records.In addition to its moral obligation to survivors, the State has numerous human rights duties under international law, including access to social services and redress. This means a redress scheme that can be accessed without unnecessary red tape and that the age profile of survivors and families be taken into account. Victims have rightly pointed out that any complicated process would only serve to delay and re-traumatise them. Everything that happens now must be about acknowledging the full extent of the wrongdoing without qualification. A real duty of care from the Government is expected now more than ever. With this in mind, the deliberate leaking of parts of the report was a disgraceful attempt to manage this story. There is a very serious case to be answered in this regard.The legacy of mother and baby homes is one of shameful crimes perpetrated against women and children by the State, the churches and other institutions. Women were abused and forced to work without pay. Children died of malnutrition, untreated illness and neglect. Some were used as guinea pigs in drug and vaccine trials. It is wrong to use the word ""home"" in respect of these institutions. A home is somewhere where one is safe, loved and belongs. These institutions were immoral prisons. There was no love, kindness or care. Our job is to ensure that the survivors now feel from us that love, dignity, and the protection of a real home. Modern Ireland must step up to the mark in providing what the Ireland of the past stole from them: the truth and justice, and the full protection and rigour of the law.I want to conclude with the words of a good friend of mine, Joan McDermott, who was imprisoned in Bessborough for eight months. She was made to cut the grass of the grounds with scissors. Joan gave birth to a baby boy whose name is David. He was taken from her without her consent or her knowledge. She did not see him again for five long decades. She said:When I saw my son for the first time in 50 years, he made the most profound statement. He asked me ""mam, how old am I really?"" He did not know how old he was. He had no birth certificate. He had never been abroad. He has a birth cert now. You and I take these things for granted.For Joan, for David, for the tens of thousands of women robbed of their futures, for the children robbed of their childhoods, for those who died behind those high walls and iron gates and who were buried in unmarked graves, and for those who made it out and survived to tell the harrowing tale, let today, though imperfect and unfinished, be the start of the final length of the long road to justice. This is not over."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-12-16	---	1	The lack of affordable and secure homes is the biggest problem facing our people for the past decade. We have a generation whose lives have been defined by this housing crisis. When the Taoiseach came to power six months ago, he said that his Government would be the Government to sort out housing, but that promise has fallen flat. Rents remain sky-high, houses remain unaffordable and the council waiting lists still heave with applicants waiting for years on end. At the sharpest end of this crisis, the number of people using homeless services has increased. We know that the true level of those experiencing homelessness is at least 20% greater than official Government figures would show.We are facing into 2021 and people are asking where the ambition is. Where is the sense of purpose from the Government to fix housing? Where is its sense of urgency to change the direction and to turn the tide of this crisis? People do not see it because it is not there. Ordinary people are paying the price. They pay it by forking out obscene rents to landlords, by living in the box room of their parents' house, and by still not being able to afford a deposit despite saving every single available euro. Far from fixing housing, the Government is making the same mistakes that got us into this mess in the first place and it is doing it with its eyes wide open. It is making mistakes that will ensure more children call a bed and breakfast home, more families face the prospect of homelessness and more young people will give up on ever owning their own home. The Government's lack of ambition was seen again on Monday when the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, re-announced his cost rental plan. A total of 350 units was the best he could do, 50 fewer than promised in the budget. Meanwhile, the Government persists with its belief that €380,000 is affordable for a three-bedroom house.It is not enough just to build houses; we have to build houses that people can really afford. The Taoiseach seems to have serious trouble understanding what actually is affordable for ordinary workers. That is because his idea of affordability is linked not to public need for decent housing but to the need for profit. I think he is afraid to do the right thing because he does not want to upset developers and landlords. We only have to look at the fact that the direct spend on affordable housing by local authorities and approved housing bodies in 2021 will be a miserable €35 million. Meanwhile, the Government puts €1 billion into the pockets of landlords by subsidising social housing tenants in the rental market. The Taoiseach is truly in an ideological cul-de-sac. At the centre of the Government's housing failure is the absence of its long-promised affordable housing plan. The Minister, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, first promised that the plan would be published in September. Then it was promised for after the budget. Then it was promised for some time in the autumn. Now the Minister is saying he will bring this plan forward to the Government soon, whatever that means.That is not good enough. People now are crying out for action. Fianna Fáil had four years to prepare for the housing Ministry. A group of officials in the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage has been working on an affordable housing policy for two years. The Taoiseach has been in charge for six months. My question is clear, it is simple and it is this: where is that affordable housing plan?The Taoiseach is indulging in the tried and tested strategy of his predecessors. Not only is he trying to explain away the housing crisis, he is trying to live in an extraordinary world of make-believe where there is no crisis. However, the crisis is real. I have rehearsed previously with the Taoiseach the fact that average rents in Dublin are now above €2,000. The average rent nationwide is now above €1,400. I have said to the Taoiseach very directly that his idea of an affordable price for a modest family home does, €380,000, does not tally with reality. I have challenged him before and I challenge him again. We will continue to challenge the Taoiseach until we see real delivery on housing at pace. That means building houses to scale, building affordable homes and building public housing on public land. That is what is required.We also need a moratorium on evictions into homelessness and real and substantive rent control. Those are the measures the Taoiseach and his friends in Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael will not take. They have not come off the path of allowing housing policy to be led by developers, landlords and vested interests. It is for the haves. The Government is now facing into 2021 with no coherent plan.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-12-16	---	2	I wish to raise the Debenhams workers again. Last night, they received proposals from the chairman of the Labour Court. Those proposals are massively disappointing for the workers and will be very little comfort to them. Many of the workers spent years working for Debenhams and they have protested for 251 days to get a fair and reasonable redundancy settlement. They are worn out, exhausted and heartbroken. The manner in which this dispute has been handled by Debenhams and also by KPMG and the Government does none of them any credit. It stands in marked contrast to the dignity and stamina of the workers concerned.When will the Taoiseach bring forward legislation to ensure that this sorry scenario does not play out again? We have had Clerys and Debenhams.The fact is that workers have been left cruelly exposed by this Government and the previous Fine Gael and Fine Gael and Labour Party Governments. All of them have let these workers down.The Government can change the law.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-12-15	---	1	On several occasions now, I have raised with the Taoiseach his refusal to pay student nurses and midwives. His decision has been met with understandable anger, not just from the students themselves but also from the public. Last Thursday, I met online with student nurses and midwives from all over the country. They shared with me their experiences and recounted the very real work they do in our hospitals. Their kindness, professionalism and dedication to nursing is in sharp contrast to the shoddy way they are being treated by the Taoiseach's Government. They are angry at the Taoiseach's suggestion that their nursing colleagues are exploiting them. They are livid, in fact, that the Taoiseach deflects from his refusal to pay them by blaming other nurses. They said to me how dare anyone, especially the Taoiseach, suggest they are being abused or exploited by other nurses. They say that the Taoiseach is the exploiter.Nurses in hospitals are facing overcrowding, a lack of staff and stressful conditions, and this is the result of decades of bad Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael policy. Student nurses walk onto those same wards and they do what comes naturally to them. They say it would go against every fibre of their being not to help patients in distress or relieve pressure on their colleagues when a ward is incredibly busy. They say that the only abuse and exploitation here is the Taoiseach's Government's persistent refusal to pay them. Other nurses are not to blame, so I ask the Taoiseach to drop that nonsense.This is about the values of his Government. Its treatment of student nurses and midwives demonstrates again that the Taoiseach's chaotic Government is completely out of touch. The appalling lack of fairness is there for all to see. Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have no problem showing up for their friends, and no problem whatsoever looking after those at the top. I refer to the developers, the big landlords and super junior Ministers and former taoisigh. Their hands are not tied then.For student nurses and midwives, it is tea and sympathy, a round of applause and Government sends them back onto the wards with their pockets empty.The Government just does not seem to get it. Student nurses did not just step into the breach at the start of this pandemic; they have always been in the breach. They have been doing the real work for years, but now because of Covid they have had to give up their part-time jobs which paid their bills and rent and helped them to cover the cost of attending college. Some have told me that, after their 13-hour shift, the first thing they do is go to the break room and cry, not only because nursing is tough but because they are broke and struggling to get by. Yet, they wipe their eyes, they get up the next day and they go back to doing it all over again. Student nurses and midwives show up every day for all of us and it is now time for the Government to show up for them.Will the Taoiseach finally do the right thing? Will he tell them that they will be paid? Make no mistake; this is what the entire country expects him to do.What is at the core of this, in reality, is a health service and a hospital system that is creaking at the seams. What is at the core of this is the fact that student nurses and midwives are very often the glue that keeps that system together and keeps the show on the road. What is also at the core of this, put very plainly, is a group of professionals in training working 13-hour shifts and not getting paid. It is as simple as that. The Taoiseach can deflect, divert and point the finger wherever he wishes but he is the Head of Government and this is now a very real problem for these students, for their families, and potentially, for the healthcare system itself. The Taoiseach is now saying that they should be paid. Is he in agreement with me that individuals working 13-hour shifts should be paid? He has stated that. The question then is why they are not being paid and what the Government is going to do to ensure that they are. I ask the Taoiseach not to take us off on a tangent with a discussion more generally around nurse education. Nobody is proposing to go back to the apprenticeship model. What we are strongly stating is that this work is being done and needs to be recognised, valued and paid.I know what is happening in our hospitals and it seems the Taoiseach does not, which is shocking.They are not supernumerary. They are working on the wards.They are.You should be paying them.Disgraceful.It is very simple. They are doing the work and the Government is not paying them.That is pretty simple and straightforward.Indeed. The Taoiseach should pay them.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-12-15	---	2	Last week, we had the very welcome news of an agreement on the Irish protocol. While we still need to see the detail and how it will be implemented in practice, such progress is important for everyone on the island. From speaking to people in Brussels this morning, it appears that there has been movement over the past 24 hours, at least in principle, on the level playing field and governance, providing some level of optimism that a deal might still be possible. However, given the shortness of time, if there is not an agreement by the end of the week, it is unlikely that the ratification process will happen this year. Could the Taoiseach give us an update on progress in the talks? Does he have a view on the possible extension of the transition period or the provisional application of the treaty until ratification can take place in January?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-12-09	---	1	Yesterday I raised with the Taoiseach the refusal of his Government to pay student nurses and midwives who have been working on the front line during this awful pandemic. I told the Taoiseach of the real anger and frustration felt by these students over the outrageous claim that they do not get paid because they do not do real work. I conveyed to the Taoiseach, in their own words, the very real work that student nurses and midwives do. The testimonies I read yesterday show that not only do student nurses and midwives do real work, they do the hardest work. They treat the sick and injured, often in the most difficult circumstances in understaffed and overcrowded hospitals. They are often on their feet for 13-hour days, rushing around performing their tasks with professionalism and compassion.Over the last eight months, student nurses and midwives have worked incredibly hard in the battle against Covid-19 and the Taoiseach should remember that these students have stepped into the breach and it was the Government that asked them to do so. They have put their health and safety at risk, given up paid work which would pay their bills due to the risk of cross-infection. They have literally held the hands of dying Covid patients as they took their last breath, when their own family members could not be with them. Not alone is this real work and hard work, this is heroic work. Student nurses and midwives have plugged the gaps created by decades of bad health policy from Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael. They have been the glue that has held our already strained health service together during the greatest public health emergency in a century. Their dedication and work have saved lives that might have been lost. The public knows this and doctors and nurses working with these students know it; the only people who do not seem to get it is the Government.I put their personal testimonies to the Taoiseach yesterday in the hope he would finally acknowledge their work and, more importantly, commit to paying them and paying them properly. The Taoiseach refused to do that and gave me some bogus rationale as to why it could not be done. The truth is that these students are on the roster, they are working and they should be paid. Surely the Taoiseach can accept that. As he was refusing to pay these student nurses and midwives, we hear he has delivered pay increases for already well-paid super junior Ministers and judges, along with pension increases for very well-paid former taoisigh. There is no complexity and no review on that front. It seems it is always very straightforward to cough up when it comes to those at the top. Big money for Ministers, judges and the people who once did the Taoiseach's job, but nothing for student nurses and midwives who have given their blood, sweat and tears for the health and safety of our people. This is shameful and it demonstrates once again whose side Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael are on. However, the people know who was there for them when it counted and I do not believe they will stand for this awful treatment of student nurses and midwives. The Taoiseach has a decision to make now. Will he finally tell these student nurses and midwives that they will be paid?Here are the truths. The truth is that student nurses and midwives are working hard. The truth is that our system and the services patients rely on would grind to a halt, in some cases, without their effort. The truth is the Taoiseach has chosen to disregard and disrespect the fact that these students work extremely hard. The only abuse at play here is the abuse of not paying these student nurses and midwives for their honest effort and work. The Taoiseach says he is not refusing to pay them. The only logical conclusion, then, is that he will pay them but to pay them he must recognise their work and effort. I will state clearly that professionalisation of nursing should not be used as an alibi or a cover for pauperising these workers.It is lost on no one that student nurses and midwives get reviews, delays and denials----------but for the great and the good, for the hoi polloi, there is no delay. They get their money. They get their increases. The sheer unfairness----------of that is manifest to one and all.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-12-09	---	2	There are currently more than 200 children waiting on scoliosis procedures. That is up 25% in two years, and almost half of these children are waiting for more than six months. This makes a mockery of the promised made by Deputy Harris, as Minister for Health, some three years ago, that no patient would wait more than four months.Serious delays in scoliosis surgery have been a huge problem long before the pandemic. As children wait for their surgery, they are not able to live a full life. Some live in pain from the time they get up in the morning until they go to bed at night.Children with scoliosis should not have to stand at the Dáil protesting their situation but, sadly, that is what young Sophie Redmond had to do. I spoke to the Taoiseach about Ms Redmond last week.The Taoiseach needs to face up to this problem now. These children and their families need real action. They need a plan from the Government and that means more specialists and nurses, and more beds to reduce waiting times.I ask the Taoiseach to respond to those 200 children currently waiting on their scoliosis procedures. What is his message to them?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-12-08	---	1	Gabhaim buíochas leis an gCeann Comhairle. At 8 o’clock this morning Joanna Sloan, a young nurse in Belfast, was the first person in Ireland to receive a vaccine for Covid-19. A little earlier a 90-year-old Fermanagh woman, Margaret Keenan, was the first person in Britain to receive the jab. We now await the vaccine roll-out plan for this part of the island. There is at last light at the end of the tunnel. Hopefully, this marks a turning of the tide in our fight against this virus and the beginning of the end.Last Wednesday, the Government voted against paying student nurses and midwives. It then justified this decision by saying that they do not get paid because they do not do real work. It has broken its promises. Promises made by the Minister for Health, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, his predecessor, Deputy Simon Harris, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil amount to nothing.We are standing here today talking about the student nurses working without pay on the same day that the Government will increase pay for super junior Ministers and judges. These are not normal times. The ask of student nurses is always incredible but it is extraordinary during a pandemic.I will share with the Taoiseach some of the messages I have been sent by student nurses and midwives in reaction to his decision. Alison writes:We start our shifts at 7:30 am. By 8, we are rushing around carrying out observations, helping patients with toileting and washes. This will bring us up to 10:30/11. Twelve o'clock comes and we do medications, blood sugars, feeds and toileting. After lunch we try and get some documentation done, call doctors, check blood results and other tasks. Teatime comes and we are back assisting with feeds, toileting and medication.It is outrageous that the Government is saying that they don't do real work.Rebecca says that she lives at home, unable to afford student housing and she comes home every night from work fearful that she has contracted the virus and could pass it to her immunocompromised Dad.Ella says that every student that was on placement was forced to give up their part-time work, the work that pays their bills. She is immunocompromised and felt in danger. She was on the ward with the highest number of Covid-19 patients in the hospital and she had to isolate.Marie writes:In third year, I dealt with a patient who had a major haemorrhage. The patient went into cardiac arrest. I ran for the crash cart, I alerted the nurses station to call the cardiac team, and I did chest compressions to try and keep that patient alive. The patient died. I drove home in silence and couldn't talk to my mother.Sinead, a student midwife, says:I have sat with women who are crying because their baby has been feeding all night. We are the ones who hold their hands and tell them everything will be ok. We are the ones who cry with them.Roisin says:Our college years are spent working thirteen hour shifts in understaffed hospitals where you are counted as a member of staff. This year is more exceptional. Students now can't work a paid job due to [fear of cross-contamination]. This creates enormous strain when it comes to paying rent, fees, transport and possibly supporting [a family].These statements illustrate the real work, real lives and real struggles of student nurses and midwives. The Taoiseach should please tell them they will be paid, and paid properly.Nobody is suggesting that we should drift backwards; far from it. We are absolutely insisting that students nurses and midwives must be acknowledged and paid for the critical tasks they carry out. We are insisting in this year and in these times above all other times, as we face into a pandemic, that we recognise and reward the real work of student nurses and midwives. Those students are among those who have kept our under-resourced and understaffed hospital system afloat. Those are the facts.It is ironic of the Taoiseach to advance as a reason for not paying student nurses and midwives an argument about the professionalisation of nursing. Professionalisation of nursing cannot result in the pauperisation of student nurses and midwives. I have read their testimonies to the Taoiseach. Those are real, lived experiences and cannot simply be ignored, particularly this year, when the Minister for Health and his predecessor, Deputy Simon Harris, made concrete promises that student nurses and midwives would be recognised, rewarded and paid. That needs to happen.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	debate	2020-12-08	---	2	The Deputy is very honest.These are the harrowing words of a victim for whom domestic violence leave would have made a real difference.I was assaulted at my place of work. He pulled me down a flight of stairs in front of a waiting room full of patients, told me he had a blade. He assaulted me in the car park but I managed to get away and call the gardaí. The following day, my boss called me into her office. She knew about the assault. She was upset that I had left the clinic unattended. She asked me if I wanted to take unpaid or annual leave for my absence from work. I told her that she could decide and shortly after, I handed in my notice. I was employed by a hospital with an emergency department, a social work department and access to meaningful intervention. Instead of being supported I was shamed.We have to face up to the fact that we have a real problem with domestic and gender-based violence in Ireland and we must do everything we can to support the victims. When a person is subjected to domestic violence they are robbed of their dignity, confidence and sense of safety. The trauma seeps into every aspect of their lives, and that includes the victim's working life. Those who suffer domestic abuse are our colleagues and often our friends. Some carry the physical and emotional impact of the violence with them into the workplace. They do so because they fear losing out on badly-needed pay or do not want to run the risk of disruption to their careers. Many cannot face going to work, some because of physical injuries - the all-too-visible bruises, black eyes and cuts - others because of the deep mental scarring. As a result they lose income and face aspersions about their reliability. Others are painfully aware of and understandably sensitive to the stigma that comes with being abused and victimised, especially when it happens at home in the place they should feel safest.No victim of domestic violence should have to face such pressures, make such decisions or feel that they have to go to work in the immediate aftermath of being assaulted. Victims need space. They need time. They need understanding so that they can seek medical treatment and psychological help and recover in any way they can from the violence they experience. Often, they need space and time to make arrangements to escape from the abusive and violent environment in which they find themselves to get away from the beatings and mental abuse. They should be provided with these supports without having to worry about work, loss of income or damage to their professional reputation.The perpetrator of the violence should not be allowed to take any more from the victim. Nor should it be that a victim's only option is to take annual or unpaid leave. The last thing a victim of domestic violence needs is the stress of a phone call from their boss, a light pay cheque or even the prospect of losing their job. They also need privacy and confidentiality. Being pressured or coerced back into the workplace before they are ready only adds to the distress. God knows they have enough to worry about, process, deal with and overcome.This Bill, which we first moved a year ago, entitles victims of domestic violence to ten days' paid leave. It is comprehensive and thorough legislation, prepared in consultation with the domestic violence sectors and providing protections for employers in line with those contained in paternity leave legislation. It is legislation which I am very pleased the Government is supporting. We wish to engage constructively with the Minister to deliver this vital support for the victims of domestic violence and I sincerely hope that this is what happens.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-12-02	---	1	Figures published yesterday by Banking & Payments Federation Ireland show a surge in mortgage approval rates for October, driven by first-time buyers. Behind that figure is a very worrying spike in house prices, which reflects the broken housing policies of this Government and the previous one. On average, first-time buyers are now borrowing €10,000 more than was the case last year. It is worse for other borrowers, who are borrowing €15,000, on average, more than was the case last year. This reflects a very serious hike in house prices, which is a problem at any time but is outrageous in the middle of a pandemic when the incomes of so many people have collapsed.The continued increase in housing prices is being compounded by Government policy. In July, the Government turbocharged the help to buy scheme, a scheme that disproportionately benefits high-income earners, transfers taxpayers' money directly into the pockets of developers and increases property prices. The Government was warned by the ESRI and others that expanding this scheme would inflate house prices, which would hurt the majority of people who are trying to buy a home, but the Government did not listen. Meanwhile, workers on much more modest incomes are totally left behind. Take-up of Rebuilding Ireland home loans for first-time buyers is down. Applications in 2020 are down by 45% and approvals are down by 50%. Since Covid, shockingly, drawdowns have collapsed by 70%. This is a consequence of the Government's discrimination against workers on the wage subsidy scheme.A comprehensive, affordable housing plan is urgently needed. The Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, spent the summer telling anyone with a pair of ears that his affordable housing plan would be published in September. We are now in December and there is no plan. The Government is five months in office and its promise to tackle the housing crisis from the get-go has fallen flat. Homes remain unaffordable for people on average incomes, rents continue to rise and house prices are up for first-time buyers despite the pandemic. The Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage said last week that he has banned co-living yet, this week, a co-living development was given planning permission in Dublin.This is not a Government that is serious about tackling the housing crisis. Behind all of the statistics and figures is an entire generation for whom home ownership is now a pipe dream, people who will struggle to keep a secure roof over their heads, people who worry about their rent and people who are in extraordinarily precarious positions, many of whom live in the box room of their mother's home, sometimes with their own children. Their situations, stories and lived reality prove that the Government's housing policies are not working.I believe that all of this can be fixed, but only with ambition and a very significant change in policy. So long as the Government's housing policy is fashioned for wealthy developers, this crisis will remain as a feature of life in Ireland. This is the truth that must be confronted. When will the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage finally publish his affordable housing plan?I will try to bring the Taoiseach in touch with some glimpse of reality. The people I referred to who are locked out of the housing market do not have massive household savings.In fact, many of them are struggling just to get by. They pay rent, which has gone through the roof, and they struggle to have any savings. Many of them have lost work and income. They are relying on a proactive approach from a competent Government to deliver a housing package, including an affordable housing plan. Covid or no Covid, the Minister said repeatedly in the summer that we would have an affordable housing plan. That plan has not materialised.We cannot go to Christmas without that plan being produced for all to see and scrutinise and then to be implemented. Those are the facts. I take no comfort from the Taoiseach's vague assurances that something will happen at some time. Will the Taoiseach tell the House, on 2 December, where this housing plan is? It was promised to us last summer. When will it be published and when will we see it?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-12-02	---	2	I am very concerned at the news this morning that AIB, a State-owned bank, is to proceed with 1,500 job losses and that there has been minimal consultation with the unions. Astonishingly, at the same time as AIB proposes to let 1,500 staff go at a time of very high unemployment, it is also seeking to buy back Goodbody Stockbrokers at a cost of more than €100 million. Not alone that, I understand that big bonuses will be back for the banking sector and will apply to this new entity. As we know, the Minister for Finance is a majority shareholder of AIB. What is the Government's view on these job losses? Has the Minister given AIB permission or approval to proceed? Does the Taoiseach know whether the Minister has raised concerns with AIB on this matter? If it is the case that Goodbody Stockbrokers comes back into the embrace of AIB, will there be a ban on large-scale bonuses?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-12-01	---	1	"Last night the British Government announced that it will not hold a public inquiry into the killing of Pat Finucane. This has come as a devastating blow to the Finucane family. Pat's widow, Geraldine, and his three children, Michael, Catherine and John, have fought for three long decades for truth. They had hoped that this week the British Government would finally seize the opportunity to do the right thing and grant the necessary inquiry, but yesterday's announcement shattered that hope.The Finucane family have rightly described the decision as ""astonishing, arrogant and cruel"". Instead of granting a public inquiry, the British Secretary of State proposes to leave the case in the hands of the PSNI and the Police Ombudsman. This ludicrous proposal flies in the face of the British Supreme Court ruling of 2019. That ruling made it crystal clear that none of the previous investigations, including police investigations, were capable of uncovering the truth as regards the extent and level of British state collusion in Pat Finucane's murder. The court ruled that these investigations failed to meet the standards of Article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights.Given the incontrovertible evidence that the British state and its agents were directly involved in the authorising and planning of the killing of Pat Finucane, it is utterly farcical that the British Secretary of State should advise the Finucane family to seek truth and justice in this way. The family knows all too well that this is not a genuine avenue to truth and justice. It is, in fact, a cul-du-sac, at the end of which is only more bluff and more delay. They see it for what it is: another confidence trick. The only reason to take this approach is to continue with the cover up and to ensure that those agents of the British state responsible are never ever held to account. In the words of Geraldine Finucane, this decision ""is yet another insult added to a deep and lasting injury"".It is clear that the British Government is determined to keep a dark cloak over the extent and depth of state collusion in the targeting and killing of nationalists in the North of Ireland. It seems that far too many powerful people have far too much to lose from the Finucane family and so many others having justice for their loved ones and peace for themselves. The British Government has set itself against the Finucane family and against the highest court in its own jurisdiction. The British Government has also set itself against the Irish Government and this Oireachtas in its call for a full public inquiry. Speaking on radio this morning, Geraldine Finucane said:I will never run out of road as long there’s breath in my body. Today is a new day. We shall take stock and move forward.It is vital that everybody in the Oireachtas moves forward together with the Finucane family in their fight because we are all united in our stance that the demand for a public inquiry is a just one and a necessary one. The family are counting on all of us to continue with our support for them. What, in the Taoiseach's view, can we now do together to ensure the British Government ends it resistance to the truth and grants a public inquiry?I thank the Taoiseach. His reiteration of the position of the Irish Government, the Irish State and the Houses of the Oireachtas that there must be a public inquiry into the killing of Pat Finucane is absolutely essential.I join the Taoiseach also in reiterating the fact that agreements entered into must be honoured and delivered on. As he rightly points out, at Weston Park and following on from it there was an acceptance that a number of cases required special investigation. As the Taoiseach rightly says, successive governments in Dublin have held up to our side of the bargain and the British Government has fallen very short - not alone that, but it has adopted a strategy that is very explicitly and obviously designed to block a public inquiry. For the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland yesterday to dangle the prospect - perhaps - of a public inquiry at a later stage more than 30 years after the killing of Pat Finucane is particularly unforgivable. Does the Taoiseach have a view as to what we can do collectively as an Oireachtas, perhaps in partnership with international figures, including President-elect Joe Biden, who has, as the Taoiseach knows, for a very long time supported the Finucane campaign for a public inquiry?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-25	---	1	We are hearing very distressing news of the death of a man who lived in a tent close to Leinster House this morning. I express my condolences to his family and friends. I just wanted to acknowledge the passing of this man, as it is almost six years to the day of Jonathan Corrie's death. The scandal of street homelessness and rough sleeping must be dealt with and it needs to happen soon.Today is International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women and it marks the start of the 16-day campaign against domestic and gender-based violence. It is an annual campaign, as the Taoiseach knows. I and others a stand up in this Chamber year after year and we recite the statistics that attempt to capture the horrific abuse and violence to which so many women and children are subjected. I have no doubt that everyone in the Dáil gets angry when they hear the heartbreaking stories of women who have been battered and emotionally broken by the violence inflicted upon them. The physical scars and bruises are all too apparent signposts of the trauma experienced, often on a daily basis. The mental suffering, the theft of victims' dignity, confidence and sense of safety is less obvious but it frequently runs deeper. The fear cast by domestic violence, by every beating, every insult and every attempt to control and degrade is something that victims can overcome, but the shadow of abuse is something they carry with them for the rest of their lives.It is time to face up to the fact that we have a real problem with domestic and gender-based violence in Ireland. It is time for the political system and Government to move past whatever unease they have about owning up to this fact. Violence against women and abuse behind closed doors and drawn curtains is at epidemic levels. The truth is that successive Governments have failed women and children who have been caught up in the horror of this abuse and until a Government confronts this problem with the honesty and the determination that it demands, too many of the cries for help from abused women will go unanswered and unheard. The domestic violence support services providers in Ireland do remarkable work, despite the fact that they have been underfunded for decades but while the abused women battled to survive the impact of the violence against them, these service providers have been battling for resources, funding and proper support from Government. I struggle to find words to express my anger about how this issue has been swept under the carpet for years. It is time our problem with domestic and gender-based violence was brought out into the open so that we can finally deliver policies, supports and the funding necessary to tackle it head on.I welcome that emergency funding is provided to help services meet Covid-19-related costs; I am very glad the Taoiseach responded to that call. This will help with the immediate Covid challenge. However, we must discuss and deal with the chronic lack of refuge places for women who need to escape the violence, the abuse and the coercive control. Between March and June of this year, 1,351 requests for refuge went unmet because the services were full. Nine counties have no refuge provision at all and this is a scandal. We know that incidents of domestic violence and abuse increase over the Christmas period. Victims, their children and the services they rely on will face a very bleak picture in 2021 if the Government does not act. I, therefore, ask the Taoiseach on this day if he will now commit to ensuring the refuge shortages across the state are urgently addressed.I too wish to send our sympathies and regards to Damien Carrick on the loss of Trish, a wonderful and courageous woman.The Taoiseach says there must be no toleration of violence against women and children in our society but the facts are that there is such a tolerance. The Taoiseach says we must do everything we can but everything is not being done. The Taoiseach says we must provide all of the necessary resources and on that point we agree. That, however, is not helped by playing games with big figures such as pointing to the additional money that has been given to Tusla when he knows not one cent of that money has been ring-fenced for domestic violence services. I know there is an audit under way. That could be a really important and significant intervention in all of this but only----------if it means there is, finally, full transparency and honesty on this issue. The tolerance to this violence is a reality in Irish society and until we look that in the eye, until we resolve to do something about it on a consistent basis and until it is front and centre in government policy we will continue year on year with people like me and the Taoiseach----------standing up and bewailing this awful situation.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-25	---	2	The continuing refusal by the Government and the Minister for Justice to come before this House to make a statement and take questions on the appointment to the Supreme Court is outrageous and unacceptable and I urge him to remedy that situation without any further delay. We have learned today that on the day his Government appointed Séamus Woulfe to the Supreme Court, a second appointment was made to the Circuit Court. Can the Taoiseach explain to us his role in that appointment? The Tánaiste, Deputy Leo Varadkar, has confirmed that he knew that the person appointed to the Circuit Court had previously worked with the former Fine Gael Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Charlie Flanagan. Was the Taoiseach aware of this when that appointment was made? Can he tell us how many applications or expressions of interest were made for that position on the Circuit Court? Can he confirm, once and for all, that there will be accountability here and that the Minister for Justice will present herself, make a statement and take questions?The Taoiseach has not answered my questions.With the proviso that there are specific questions-----There has to be accountability here.To make a statement.On the appointment to the Circuit Court that I asked about, was the Taoiseach aware that the person appointed had a previous professional relationship with the former Fine Gael Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Charles Flanagan?Can the Taoiseach inform us if there were other expressions of interest in this post? Please do not give the waffle about JAAB. That is one channel. There are others.If the Taoiseach does not understand that at this stage, I have to wonder-----Were there other applicants?We want a statement.No, we are not.A Cheann Comhairle, can I assist you in this so that we have perfect clarity?We are not saying anything of the sort. If the Ceann Comhairle is convening a meeting of the Business Committee with a view to the Minister presenting herself, making a full statement and taking questions and answers, that is precisely what the Opposition has sought now for weeks on end.I ask then that the Taoiseach take to his feet and confirm it will be a full statement, with questions and answers, as per precedent in this House.Does the Ceann Comhairle want the Business Committee to meet so that the Government Chief Whip will let-----That is disingenuous.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-24	---	1	I am sure the Taoiseach will agree that the courage and resilience shown by the family of Pat Finucane in their battle with the British state is inspirational. Pat Finucane was killed in February 1989 by a UDA death squad working in collusion with RUC special branch, the British Army's force reconnaissance unit and the British state. For three decades, like so many others, the family have fought a formidable campaign seeking a public inquiry into Pat's killing. Despite incontrovertible evidence that British state agents were directly involved in authorising and planning the killing, successive British Governments have blushed and stalled to prevent this.An outcome of the Weston Park talks in 2001 was to appoint a judge to make recommendations on the need for public inquiries into a number of conflict-related deaths and, where required, that the relevant Government would implement the recommendation. Judge Peter Cory reported on 1 April 2004 and recommended a public inquiry into the killing of Patrick Finucane. That was more than 16 years ago. In 2012, the then British Prime Minister, David Cameron, acknowledged that there had been, as he put it, shocking levels of collusion in this killing. That was eight years ago. The British Supreme Court ruled in February last year that all previous investigations into the killing of Pat Finucane were incapable of establishing the full facts and failed to meet the standards of Article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights. Pat's widow, Geraldine, had to bring a judicial review against the British Secretary of State for his failure to act on this decision. On 11 October last, the barrister acting for the Secretary of State told the court a decision on an inquiry would be taken on or before 30 November. That is next Monday and the family are still waiting.The EU Council of Ministers has expressed its deep concern that a decision still has not been taken by the British Government. That is a concern we all share. Only a public inquiry can assist the family to get the truth. The Finucane family have spoken truth to power for 30 years. They have not been and will not be silenced. Their questions deserve answers and their questions will not go away. The British Government has an obligation to ensure that the truth is told. I have written to the British Prime Minister urging that his Government fulfil Britain's international human rights obligations and hold a public inquiry.I also wrote to the Taoiseach last week and I asked him to engage with Mr. Johnson at this critical juncture. I know the Taoiseach met with the Finucane family yesterday. I know they have thanked him for his support and, in particular, they thanked him for his commitment to engage with Boris Johnson ahead of the 30 November deadline. It is incredibly important that the demand for a public inquiry has the full weight of the office of An Taoiseach behind it. It is also important that there is a unified stance from the whole Oireachtas in support of the Finucane family. It is in that spirit that I ask the Taoiseach when he will make this urgent contact with Mr. Johnson. Will he make it absolutely clear to the British Prime Minister that a full public inquiry must happen as soon as possible because the Finucane family has already waited far too long?I thank the Taoiseach for that. From day one, as he knows, the British Government has resisted revealing the truth on the killing of Pat Finucane. In 2012, his wife, Geraldine, said:At every turn, dead witnesses have been blamed and defunct agencies found wanting. Serving personnel and active state departments appear to have been excused. The dirt has been swept under the carpet without any serious attempt to lift the lid on what really happened to Pat and so many others.I am sure that everyone in the Dáil hopes that the British Government will now stop resisting the truth and that Mr. Johnson will announce a full public inquiry because, as I have said and as the Taoiseach has so graciously reiterated, the Finucane family should not have to suffer any longer. They should not have to fight any longer. All the lies, bluffing and stalling have to end. Only the truth will give them peace. I ask the Taoiseach again to do everything he can to ensure they finally have that.The criteria are all about process. One cannot have a process without them.It does not.Hear, hear.Do your job, Taoiseach.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-18	---	1	"Yesterday, the Taoiseach's Government voted to block the Dáil from putting questions to the Minister for Justice, Deputy McEntee, regarding the appointment of the former Attorney General, Séamus Woulfe, to the Supreme Court. His claim that this would impinge on the separation of powers is utter nonsense, as he well knows. In the Dáil in 2017, the Taoiseach said that any attempt to use the separation of powers as an excuse to avoid accountability in respect of a judicial appointment was ""bogus"". He will know that, on that occasion, a debate was held and questions were put.The Government is clearly circling the wagons. This morning, Green Party Minister, Deputy Catherine Martin, was wheeled out to make this same bogus argument on radio. The Government knows that the Minister is accountable to the Dáil and is duty-bound to take questions. The Government came into office on 27 June. Séamus Woulfe stood down as Attorney General on that date. The proposal to appoint him to the Supreme Court came to Government on 16 July, just three weeks later. In addition to Mr. Woulfe, three sitting judges had also expressed an interest in this position. The Minister did not have just one name to consider, but four. She needs to explain very clearly how she whittled down that list of four names to one. By what criteria was that selection made? With whom did she confer and collaborate? Who did she inform? Why did the Minister fail to inform the Taoiseach and Government colleagues of expressions of interest from these judges in advance of the decision to appoint Séamus Woulfe?It beggars belief that no member of Government asked whether there were other applications. The Taoiseach, the Tánaiste and the leader of the Green Party were all left out of the loop in a Supreme Court appointment. Not one of the three men charged with leading Government asked questions about this important matter. If this is true, it is remarkable. In the endgame of government formation talks between Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael, the Taoiseach announced that the position of Attorney General would be rotated in line with that of Taoiseach. The position was central to the horse trading. Séamus Woulfe, the outgoing Attorney General and a long-term member of Fine Gael, was appointed to the Supreme Court.In 2017, the Taoiseach described the appointment of former Attorney General, Máire Whelan, to the Court of Appeal as ""an insider appointment"" and said that ""it stinks to high heaven."" In that case, he was incredulous and angry that other applicants for the position had not been treated fairly. It is, therefore, very strange that he did not ask if there were other applicants on this occasion. When calling for a debate and a session of questions and answers in 2017, the Taoiseach said that the Government's reaching for the separation of powers was ""bogus"" and he criticised the Government for resisting taking questions. He was right then but he is very wrong now. Blocking the Dáil from putting questions to the Minister for Justice stinks to the highest heavens. It raises the question of whether this was the type of insider appointment against which the Taoiseach railed three years ago.For the sake of clarity, for transparency and to ensure this Oireachtas can do its job and discharge its responsibilities, I ask the Taoiseach to ensure the Minister, Deputy McEntee, comes before the Dáil to make a statement on these matters and to take questions.The Taoiseach's response is incoherent gibberish and he knows it. The Taoiseach has changed his tune from when he sat on the Opposition benches and correctly challenged the Government of the day to give an account of itself and challenged the then Minister for Justice and Equality to give an account of the process by which a selection for a judicial appointment was made. The standards then are the standards now. The responsibility of the Oireachtas to hold the Government to account remains paramount. The Taoiseach reaches for the JAAB process, even though he knows that was one of two channels through which names came forward. Please do not rehearse that nonsense again. That there was horse-trading around the position of Attorney General is not only truthful, it is a verifiable truth. It played out in the media between Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael and, let it be said, the Green Party.I hear that the Taoiseach does not want to be further embroiled in these questions so the straightforward, correct and proper thing to happen is that the Minister for Justice presents herself and gives an account of those three weeks between 27 June and 16 July and sets out, for the satisfaction of this Oireachtas, the process by which four names became one and four applicants became Seamus Woulfe. That is what this Oireachtas demands and deserves."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-18	---	2	I raise the issue of Dublin Zoo. Zoos across the island are under pressure but Dublin Zoo is in big trouble and we woke this morning to the news that it might face closure. I need not tell the Taoiseach that a closure would be devastating for local employment and the economy, as well as for tourism. Dublin Zoo is one of our key tourist attractions and has occupied a special place for children and families right across the island for generations. The director of the zoo, Dr. Christoph Schwitzer, was quoted today as saying that one cannot switch off a zoo when one goes home. He also remarked that one cannot furlough an elephant, a zebra or a giraffe. There is a need for funding. I have been in touch with the Minister of State, Deputy Malcolm Noonan, about this issue over the last few months. He wishes to be helpful but the fund of €500,000 for zoos is just not enough. I am sure the Taoiseach, like me, does not want Dublin Zoo or any of the other zoos to face closure. I appeal to him to intervene and to ensure the necessary supports are made available. Generally, the zoo is a not-for-profit organisation and does not rely on public moneys but it needs help now.Public housing.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-17	---	1	Can I respond to the statement?Thank you, a Cheann Comhairle. All of us value the independence of the Judiciary and every measure must be taken to protect that. I appreciate the events as set out by the Taoiseach. The Judiciary chose an informal process of its own and it reported on the matter of Mr. Justice Woulfe's attendance at a golfing event in Clifden. I hear also the Taoiseach's determination that the Oireachtas would take no further steps. However, the Chief Justice expressing no confidence in a member of the Bench remains problematic. I believe there ought to be some mediated solution to this particular issue.On a wider matter, it is essential for the Oireachtas that the Government is fully accountable and that the Minister for Justice, Deputy McEntee, would attend and answer all of the relevant and pertinent questions around the appointment process of Mr. Justice Woulfe to the Bench.This is not my Leaders' question, by the way. I am responding to the Taoiseach's statement.No. The Taoiseach has made a statement. I asked to respond to the statement and I thought that was clear.I accept that.The Taoiseach commenced proceedings this afternoon by making a statement of considerable importance. I am taking the opportunity to respond to that.No. The Sinn Féin Whip spoke to the Ceann Comhairle in advance of the sitting to indicate that if the Taoiseach makes a significant statement, the Opposition should get an opportunity to respond to it. I think that is only fair.I am not asking to make up rules.I have made my brief statement and I believe other leaders would in addition wish to make a statement on the matter.I have made my case to the Taoiseach. I wish to make it clear that it is essential that the Minister for Justice, Deputy McEntee, makes herself available to the House to make a full statement and to take questions.Are other party leaders not going to be given an opportunity to respond?Last night, an overwhelming majority of Dublin city councillors, including some colleagues of the Taoiseach, voted against transferring public land to a private developer. The councillors took a stand for public housing on public land to meet social and affordable need. They know this is the only way to tackle this city's overwhelming housing crisis. The proposal for Oscar Traynor Road in Coolock was a bad deal. It would have seen a very valuable site gifted to a private developer for free. Half of the proposed homes would have been sold at unaffordable open market prices and the 20% that were meant to be affordable were not affordable. The full cost of these homes would have been €325,000 for a one-bedroom home and up to €380,000 for a three-bedroom house. That is off the wall and it is certainly not affordable for the vast majority of working people. Under this deal, the council would have been paying over the odds for the social homes and, worst of all, the developer would have pocketed full market value of the land, land that it got for free, meaning significant profits for the developer.This crazy deal represents the very worst of Fine Gael housing policy. It is proof positive that as long as housing policy is directed by wealthy developers, we will never fix this housing crisis. The refusal of the previous Government to fund large-scale public housing developments left councils with few options, but it does not have to be that way. We can move on from a generation having to settle for the box room of their parents' home as a home for their own families, from couples scrimping and saving every spare euro but still not being able to get a deposit together and from young people being ripped off by sky-high rents. We can get a good deal for people who need affordable housing and social housing. The Government can fund councils to deliver public housing on public land to meet social and affordable housing need.The Oscar Traynor Road development can proceed in the same timeframe as originally envisaged, but it will need Government support. It needs the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to work with Dublin City Council to secure a long-term, low-interest European Investment Bank loan and a serviced sites fund grant from his Department. In other words, it needs exactly the same deal as the one being used for St. Michael's Estate in Inchicore, Dublin 8. That deal would ensure affordable rents, at approximately €800 per month, and affordable purchases, at €230,000 or less.Will the Taoiseach support public housing on public land? Will he work with Dublin City Council to ensure all of the homes on the Oscar Traynor Road site are genuinely affordable? Finally, will he instruct the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to assist Dublin City Council to secure the funding that is required to develop the Oscar Traynor Road site as a matter of urgency?This is not a matter of ideology, but of pure common sense. That is why I assume the Taoiseach's colleagues on Dublin City Council, or a good number of them, voted down this proposal. It is a matter of proper standards, the right approach to housing policy and a matter of logic that one does not hand over massively valuable sites to private developers so that they can profit and ordinary working people are still left outside the housing market.The sum of €380,000 for a three-bedroom home is not affordable to the vast majority of working people. That is the reality. The Taoiseach is quite correct: the site has been vacant since the 1970s. Let it be recorded that the previous Government the Taoiseach supported by way of confidence and supply refused the fund the proper development of public housing on this hugely valuable site. I am asking the Taoiseach if he will change that policy.Will this Government on his watch now assist Dublin City Council in the way I have set out----------to ensure that the site is developed efficiently and that it results in affordable housing for people who desperately need it?That they can afford.That they can afford.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	debate	2020-11-17	---	2	Covid-19 has heightened awareness of the depth and breadth of domestic violence and abuse. Every day during the first six months of the pandemic, 19 women and three children contacted a domestic violence service for the first time, seeking support and safety from abuse and coercive control. Coercive control is now a crime and last month's landmark judgment sends a simple message to abusers to stop. However, despite the significant increase in demand for services, this year domestic violence and abuse continues to be under-reported due to stigma, shame and fear. One in five women will experience violence in their own home and 41% of Irish women know someone in their circle of family or friends who has experienced intimate partner violence.Domestic violence is mostly talked about as occurring in the home, but in reality the abuse often follows victims into the workplace. Co-workers may be aware of a colleague's abuse, but in the absence of a workplace policy they are unsure of how best to support them. Managers need guidance on how to recognise the signs of domestic abuse and how to respond to a staff member's disclosure. Employers in the public and private sectors must introduce domestic violence awareness policies and procedures for managers and staff. As legislators, we also have a role in protecting women in the workplace and ensuring victims' rights and entitlements as employees are enhanced and protected.Our legislation provides for a statutory annual entitlement of up to ten days' domestic violence paid leave. This provision would enable victims to take the time they need to seek support, find accommodation or attend court in a structured and supported environment. It also addresses unpredictable absenteeism and reduced productivity for employers.Last year Vodafone introduced ten days' domestic violence paid leave and additional supports for its employees globally. New Zealand, Australia and provinces of Canada have all introduced forms of paid leave. Our ratification of the Istanbul Convention and enactment of supporting legislation means that we now need to follow suit.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	debate	2020-11-11	---	1	Very witty.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-11	---	2	The Government came to office four months ago promising to take major action on housing. The harrowing stories from people whose lives have been ruined by the housing crisis are well known to all of us: young couples who cannot afford a home of their own, some living with their children in the box room of their mammy's house; struggling renters who hand a chunk of their wages over to landlords every month; and families on council waiting lists for years, with no light at the end of the tunnel. For an entire generation, the security of having an affordable roof over their heads has been reduced to a pipe dream, and this is the devastating result of decades of bad housing policy from successive Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael-led Governments.The lack of urgency from the Government on this matter is very concerning. The Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, spent the entire summer on the media telling people that he would publish his affordable housing plan in September, but September came, September went and still no affordable housing materialised. The budget came in October and it, too, was a massive disappointment. The housing measures fell far short of what is needed to deal with the most serious affordable and social housing crisis in the history of the State. More new money will go to private landlords and private developers than will go towards genuinely affordable homes for working people. So long as housing policy in this State is directed by and for wealthy developers and landlords, we will never fix the housing crisis and our people will continue to suffer.We see from the latest report, published on Monday, that renters are still suffering because of a failure of the Government to act. The report shows that rents are rising right across the State, with increases of almost 3% outside Dublin in the past year. It is alarming to see rental increases of almost 5% in Cork, Galway and Waterford and hikes as large as 7% in counties such as Wexford. The average State-wide rent now stands at €1,419 per month. New Dublin city rents now average €2,028. There is no good news for renters here in the capital. This crisis is clearly getting worse. Just as when it comes to affordable housing, there is no response from the Minister. Budget 2021 contained nothing for renters, no action to stop rent rises, no measures to put money back in renters' pockets and no funding to deliver the volume of affordable cost-rental accommodation that our cities and our country desperately need. These are the measures and solutions that Sinn Féin has consistently urged the Government to adopt, and ignoring these solutions was a serious failure on its part.In the midst of the pandemic, hard-pressed tenants are paying the price of this failure in the form of increasing rents. Surely an emergency of this nature should have been a catalyst to deliver secure and affordable housing. Instead, people got the opposite: higher rents and a higher cost of living, which is incredible. What does the Taoiseach propose to do about this? Does he now recognise and accept that there is an urgent and immediate need for his Government to introduce measures to stop rent increases? When will we finally see his Government's affordable housing plan?How are these for some facts that the Taoiseach might acquaint himself with? Fact one is that RPZs do not, have not and will not work. Fact two is the evidence, if the Taoiseach cares to see it, that rents are rising. The average rent is more than €1,400 across the State. That is astonishing. By the way, this is not for the Taj Mahal, it is for a two-bedroom unit here in Dublin city. How is this for a fact? The Government has not produced its affordable housing plan. The Taoiseach should not accuse me of propagandistic speech when I simply present him with those facts. It is extraordinary that the Taoiseach could big-up his budget of all budgets of €3.3 billion for housing and yet deliver nothing, zilch, nada for renters. The Government delivers plenty for landlords because, despite what he says, that is still the focus of its policy. What is the Taoiseach going to do for those young workers and families who must find more than €2,000 here in Dublin city, or more than €1,400 elsewhere across the State, every month to hand over to landlords. Where is the relief and support now for those people and those families?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-11	---	3	Monday was equal pay day in Ireland, meaning that from now until the end of this year women across Ireland will effectively work for free due to the gender pay gap of over 14%. I am sure the Taoiseach will agree with me that this is an unacceptable situation in 2020. The Taoiseach is also aware that student nurses working in placements across our hospitals during the pandemic are not being paid at all. If there is one thing worse than unequal pay it is not being paid at all. As the Taoiseach knows, the work they do is highly skilled, demanding and absolutely critical to the running of our hospitals, yet it is unpaid. The overwhelming majority of these student nurses are, as it happens, women, although men are not being paid either, and ought to be. Student nurses believe they are undervalued. They use the term exploited and it is the right word. They are at the front line in this once-in-a-century pandemic.I want to know when the Taoiseach will end this scandal and ensure that student nurses get paid.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-10	---	1	I am sure the Taoiseach will join with me in sending our sympathies to the Palestinian people on the loss of Saeb Erekat, secretary general of the Palestine Liberation Organization, who died this morning. He was a great advocate for peace, stability and a homeland for the Palestinian people. The world is a poorer place for the loss of him.Joe Biden was elected as the next President of the United States on Saturday last. Mr. Biden's election is good for Ireland in many ways. He is, as we know, proud of his Irish roots and he is, without doubt, a long-standing friend of Ireland. During the presidential election campaign and throughout his time in office, he has acted to promote and protect peace, progress and the Good Friday Agreement. He comes to the office of President at a time of threat from the British Government, with both Brexit and the refusal to honour agreements looming large. The President-elect and both parties in Congress have made clear that there will be no trade agreement with Britain unless the Good Friday Agreement is safeguarded in all of its parts.The election of Joe Biden has, I believe, the potential to reshape the nature of the Brexit negotiation, particularly with regard to the aggressive and arrogant approach taken by the Tory Government and Boris Johnson to Irish interests. Throughout this process, Tories have actively sought to undermine the Good Friday Agreement and, most recently, Mr. Johnson has played a reckless game by using as a bargaining chip the protection secured for Ireland as part of the withdrawal agreement. Central to this game-playing has been Mr. Johnson's dangerous Internal Market Bill. The latter undermines protections that are absolutely vital to ensuring there will be no reimposition of a hard border on our island, safeguarding the all-island economy and protecting the Good Friday Agreement and our hard-won peace. The recklessness of this Bill is such that even the House of Lords last night voted to strip out powers that would allow Tory Ministers to break international law.Instead of preparing for an end to the transition period, Mr. Johnson used the smoke and mirrors of this Bill to sow confusion and mistrust in negotiations. Perhaps this was an effort to buy time to see where the chips landed in the US election. Now that election is over and in President-elect Biden, Ireland and the EU negotiating team have a very formidable ally, one who has already impressed upon the British Prime Minister that playing fast and loose with the future of this island simply will not be tolerated. It is time for Mr. Johnson to realise that the best way forward for all of us, including Britain, is to engage in what remains of negotiations in good faith, to respect international law and their agreements. A very necessary first step is that the British Government drop its dangerous internal market Bill.Throughout the Brexit process, it has been critical to defending Ireland's interests that we have spoken as one. I believe this unified approach in the Dáil has yielded much success and I believe this is how we must proceed as we enter the Brexit endgame because the decisions made in the closing stages of negotiations will have ramifications for years, indeed, for generations, to come. I ask the Taoiseach, therefore, how he plans to work on a cross-party all-of-the-Oireachtas basis over these coming crucial weeks.Notwithstanding all of the difficulties that have presented in the course of this process, there is no doubt that a deal is still possible. If good sense is to prevail then there will be a deal but of course we cannot be certain of any of that. That is why I have raised this issue with the Taoiseach today. There are many issues on which the Oireachtas will divide, that is in the nature of our system and of our political differences, which are honestly held, but on this issue, and particularly since the edifice of the Good Friday Agreement and the peace process itself cannot be disrupted, undermined or weakened in any way, it is absolutely essential we act as one. I therefore ask the Taoiseach that we have, as a matter of regular occurrence, briefings and contact not just with Sinn Féin or myself as its leader but with all Opposition parties and with the Houses as a whole because as weeks now start to tick down and as pressure intensifies, it becomes all the more important that full briefings and full information is shared.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-04	---	1	Yesterday afternoon the Taoiseach told the Dáil that he accepted Deputy Leo Varadkar's version of events regarding his leaking of a confidential document to his friend when he was Taoiseach. Yesterday evening Deputy Leo Varadkar, now Tánaiste and leader of Fine Gael, came to the Dáil to give his explanation of why he leaked this confidential and sensitive document to a personal friend and political supporter in April 2019. His defence fell apart.We learned that the scenario that played out is more serious than any of us could have imagined. Deputy Varadkar's core alibi, that he was operating a strategy to get the National Association of General Practitioners, NAGP, on board in the public interest, was blown out of the water. The claims the Minister for Justice, Deputy McEntee, made on radio, that the Tánaiste's leak was part of an ongoing process of engagement with that organisation, are simply not true. The Minister for Justice misled the public because there was no such process of engagement between the NAGP and the Department of Health. There was direct engagement when Deputy Leo Varadkar's friend, the president of the NAGP, requested and was given a confidential document. Similarly, the Minister of State, Deputy Burke, claimed on RTÉ news that the Tánaiste's actions were not so serious after all because no amendments had been made to the leaked confidential document. This is also absolutely untrue. The truth is that the document leaked by Deputy Varadkar was not the final document and amendments were made by the time the Irish Medical Organisation, IMO, voted on the contract on 19 May 2019. As such, the Tánaiste's claim that he was acting in the public interest has been exposed as absolute spin. This was a dig-out for a friend and a political ally whose organisation was in free fall and who needed the information contained in the contract to try to fight for his organisation's survival.Yesterday, the Taoiseach told the Dáil that the Tánaiste's leaking of this document was a one-off event and that it was not part of a pattern of behaviour. He said the Tánaiste had assured him that something like this had never happened before and that he accepted that assurance. However, on the floor of the Dáil yesterday evening, the Tánaiste admitted very clearly that he has broken Cabinet confidentiality in the past. The Taoiseach clearly was not aware of that. He is aware of it now. I want to know if he has asked the Tánaiste about this. Can he establish what information the Tánaiste has leaked before?We also discovered on the floor of the Dáil that the then Minister for Health, Deputy Harris, had also been approached by the Tánaiste's friend looking for the same document. Was the Taoiseach aware of this fact or did the Tánaiste fail to give him the full facts? Will the Taoiseach tell us what on earth is going on here? It seems that members of Fine Gael in the Government are providing the public with wrong information and perhaps providing the Taoiseach with no information. The truth is that this is a very Fine Gael thing - government by who one knows. Thousands of struggling families are wondering if the reason they did not get an extension to their mortgage break is that another Fine Gael friend and former Minister of State, Brian Hayes, now represents the banks. I have no doubt that people in businesses being ripped off on insurance costs will scratch their heads and wonder when they see another former Fine Gael Minister of State and friend, Michael D'Arcy, the Minister of State who was supposed to take on the insurance industry, jump ship and become a lobbyist for big finance. This is the politics of the cosy club, of favours for friends. I want to know what the Taoiseach is going to do about it, because the story is not over.The Taoiseach promised yesterday that all documents relating to this matter would be released. That needs to happen immediately. We need the full paper trail. Will the Taoiseach speak to the Attorney General to establish, for the avoidance of doubt, that the then Taoiseach did not in fact break the law?May I again make it clear that I wish to see all the documentation? I am not surmising there is a vast quantity of it. On the contrary, I am asserting that there is very little documentation because the basis for the explanation that the Taoiseach, astonishingly, accepts from the Tánaiste is that he was acting in the public interest and on the basis of a deep and enduring level of contact with the NAGP. That is simply factually incorrect. I would not thank the Tánaiste for appearing before the Dáil and taking questions. I do not think any Member should get a round of applause for so doing.I respectfully suggest that the agenda of the Government is hugely dependent on public confidence and trust and a sense that when a former Taoiseach and serving member of Cabinet is found to have leaked a confidential document to his friend, when that is established as a matter of fact, and when that same individual states on the record of the Dáil that he has before leaked confidential information from Cabinet, the people expect action to be taken.That is my view. I ask the Taoiseach again what he proposes to do. Will he ask the people simply to take all of this on the chin? Deputy Leo Varadkar's alibi was comprehensively dismantled on the floor of the Dáil. It bears no credibility.What is the Taoiseach going to do? What contact will he have with a man who has told the House that he routinely leaks from the Cabinet? Is that okay with the Taoiseach?Pathetic.No danger of that.Is the Taoiseach threatening me?No danger of the Taoiseach-----Incorrect information has been entered into the record of the Dáil.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-04	---	2	I want to address the ban on the sale of essential clothing for children, which has caused a lot of stress and distress for families throughout the State. We are heading into a very cold winter. Children grow and they need new coats and shoes. Parents across the land are frustrated that they have no option but to buy online. That suits some people but it certainly does not suit many others, particularly low-income families. People scratched their heads in amazement when they heard the Minister of State, Deputy English, proclaim that clothes are not essential. They are very much essential and, coming into wintertime, warm clothing is particularly essential for children and babies. A bit of cop on and common sense needs to apply in this matter and also a bit of thoughtfulness for families with young children. What is the Taoiseach going to do about this issue?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-11-03	---	1	"Over the weekend, it was revealed that Deputy Leo Varadkar, when Taoiseach, leaked a confidential document to a friend. The document was a confidential draft copy of the 2019 GP services contract, a contract with a value of €210 million. The contract was negotiated between the State and the Irish Medical Organisation, IMO. Deputy Varadkar's friend was president of a rival organisation, the National Association of General Practitioners.The facts of what happened are not in dispute. Deputy Varadkar has confirmed that, as Taoiseach, he leaked this document to his friend on a date between 11 and 16 April 2019. The document was a draft. As his own handwritten notes on the leaked document confirmed, it was subject to amendment and change. The grateful appreciation of his friend to Deputy Varadkar, as Taoiseach, was expressed as follows, ""To be fair, Leo always delivers."" That his friend, Dr. Maitiú Ó Tuathail, was eager to protect Deputy Varadkar, then Taoiseach, is evident in the published exchanges and little wonder given that he had campaigned for Deputy Varadkar to become the leader of Fine Gael.The leaking of this document was not motivated by public interest: it was giving a dig out to a friend, it is as crude as that, a friend whose organisation was in competition with the IMO for members, subscriptions and influence. It was an organisation that subsequently collapsed and was liquidated in July 2019. So it is clear that Deputy Varadkar abused his position as Taoiseach. He will give an account of himself later today.The Taoiseach is now head of Government and Deputy Varadkar serves as Tánaiste. The Taoiseach has stated publicly that while these events were not best practice that no law has been broken and, further, that he has confidence in the Tánaiste.Given his stated position, can the Taoiseach tell us when the Tánaiste informed him that he had leaked this document? Did he wake up to the news on Saturday morning? Who gave Deputy Leo Varadkar the GP contract document in the first place? When did this matter come to Cabinet? Was that when Deputy Leo Varadkar was furnished with the document? Did every member of Cabinet receive the same document? Did Deputy Varadkar inform any other member of Cabinet or any official that he intended to, or had, leaked the document? Was the IMO informed of his course of action before or after he had sent the document to his friend? How has the Taoiseach established that this was a one off event and not a pattern of behaviour? Has Deputy Varadkar leaked other documents? What was meant by ""to be fair, Leo always delivers""? Has the Taoiseach asked him that? The Taoiseach has been categoric that no law has been broken. Is that the position of the Attorney General? Is it the position of the Attorney General that Deputy Leo Varadkar has not broken the law? Finally, has the Taoiseach seen all the correspondence, documents and notes of conversations between the National Association of General Practitioners, the Department of Health, the Minister for Health and the Department of An Taoiseach? Has he scrutinised all those? Why is it that he refuses to publish all this correspondence, documents and notes of conversations for public scrutiny?I would prefer if the Taoiseach answered my questions.I welcome that all of the documentation will be made public from the Taoiseach's Department and the Department of Health. However, the questions I asked were not for the Tánaiste but for the Taoiseach. When was he informed that this document had been leaked, when did the Tánaiste tell him about it, when did the Tánaiste get the GP document, had he informed other members of Cabinet about it, and so on? I am assuming that the Taoiseach has explored all of these matters with the Tánaiste and others because he has essentially given him a clean bill of health. He has said that these are matters of not best practice. Weasel words if ever I heard them. What I was trying to elicit from the Taoiseach is some sense of how he arrived at the conclusion that there was no criminality involved and that there is really nothing to see here bar a failure to reach best practice. I do not have the scope to record my questions again but I ask that the Taoiseach answer them. He might start with when the Tánaiste informed him that he had, in fact, leaked this document.You are Taoiseach now.I asked the Taoiseach whether the Attorney General-----I am asserting-----I asked whether the Attorney General had given the Taoiseach advice.I have asked whether the Attorney General has given the Taoiseach advice.Has the Attorney General given the Taoiseach advice? That is the question.They have been put but they have not been answered."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-10-21	---	1	"At midnight we will enter our second lockdown of this pandemic. Workers, families and communities are being asked to make enormous sacrifices once again. People will lose their jobs and businesses are being told to close. Families are being told to stay apart and lives are being disrupted and put on hold. Understandably, there is a great deal of anxiety. There is also anger and frustration, but I have no doubt people will play their part.In asking people to make these sacrifices the Government must also play its part. The lockdown suppresses the virus and buys us time. That is all. The most important thing we have in our fight against Covid is an efficient and effective testing and tracing system. It is hard to believe that we are nearly eight months into this pandemic and the Government has failed to get this right. This matter has been raised endlessly with the Government during those eight months. The contact tracing system became so swamped at the weekend that it completely broke down and collapsed. Now, between 2,000 and 2,500 people who tested positive for Covid-19 will today receive a text message from the HSE and they will be asked to tell their own close contacts of their positive test and, in turn, to ask those contacts to immediately contact their GP to seek a test. We are asking people who have tested positive to do the job of a contact tracer and to give their contacts health advice. This is a sure recipe for infections being missed and further outbreaks not being caught in time.I accept that the growth in demand will have put the system under enormous pressure at the weekend. What I do not accept is the Government's failure to provide the necessary level of staff and resources. The warning signs were there. Dr. Anne Dee, a specialist in public health in the mid-west, rang the alarm bell loudly and clearly two weeks ago. She made it clear that regional health departments do not have enough staff to do contact tracing. She said:We can’t cope with the volume of work, there are not enough of us. Outbreaks will be missed, and the situation will get worse. The regional public health system is as close to collapse as it has been at any time before.I commend our public health teams that are doing Trojan work in extraordinarily difficult circumstances. They understand that contact tracing is absolutely essential to getting in front of the virus, controlling its spread and protecting our people. We also know that failure to get this right will mean a cycle of damaging lockdowns, with all the hardship and suffering that entails. The reality is that we have to lock down when the virus is out of control and we lose control of the virus when testing and tracing do not work.Will the Taoiseach indicate what is going wrong that we still do not have the number of contact tracers that we need? Promises were made by the Government in July and again in September that recruitment would take place. Why is that taking so long? We need to get to a point where we have a 24-hour turnaround for testing and a 24-hour turnaround for contact tracing. Does the Taoiseach accept that that is where we need to be by the end of this six-week lockdown? If he does accept this, which I hope he does, can we get weekly progress reports on how many staff are being hired and how we are progressing towards meeting these goals?I thank the Taoiseach for again rehearsing the figures for testing. I am aware that the target of 100,000 set in the springtime has now been met and surpassed. However, in the words of the WHO, ""You will never test too much"", and that capacity will need to be built on.I asked about contact tracing. The facts are that this system collapsed over the weekend, which is extremely alarming, happening as it does on the eve of us moving into another lockdown. I made the point to the Taoiseach that unless we get the testing capacity right and keep developing it, and unless we have a tracing system that is efficient enough to turn around in a 24-hour period, we are storing up big trouble for ourselves. We are heading into another lockdown and all of us, including the Taoiseach, know what that entails. We need to come out of this six-week experience with a state-of-the-art gold-standard testing-and-tracing system. That means a 24-hour turnaround universally for testing and a 24-hour turnaround universally for tracing. That must be our objective and we are far short of that now.I want to hear from the Taoiseach today that he accepts that we need to get to that gold standard, that the Government will produce a plan to get us there over the next six weeks and that he will report to the House every week on the progress made to meet that objective."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-10-21	---	2	We are all agreed that the manner in which the Debenhams workers have been treated by their former employer is a shame and a disgrace. This week, Members from across the House, including ourselves in Sinn Féin, Solidarity - People Before Profit, the Labour Party, the Social Democrats, the Independent Group, the Rural Independent Group and others have come together to call on the Government to intervene. We agree that the actions of KPMG are wrong. When workers in this country go looking for their rights, they should not be taken to court and there is now a need for an urgent intervention from the Taoiseach because a resolution to this dispute is possible. The High Court has recognised the scope for engagement between KPMG and workers to this end. Yesterday, the Taoiseach said he was willing to convene a meeting between KPMG and the workers' representatives. I would like him to state today when he will convene that meeting.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	debate	2020-10-21	---	3	What happened behind the high walls of the mother and baby homes casts a long and very dark shadow over our country. The women and children, many of whom were placed in these institutions by the State, were abused and exploited. They were stigmatised, vilified, and considered outcasts from society. The awful abuse of single mothers, the forced separation of families and the horrors of what happened in places such as Tuam are still so very hard to comprehend. Perhaps, as a society, we will never fully understand or be reconciled with the brutal way these women are treated, or how that awful treatment impacted on their lives and walked every step of the way with them. We will perhaps never know fully or grasp the full extent of the abuse that they suffered, the horror and the pain. There are depths to the trauma perpetrated in these mother and baby homes that we can never hope to understand but we can know and we can learn. Survivors can uncover more about who they are and they expect, as a minimum, the veil of secrecy to be cast aside for good. I appreciate absolutely that this archive must be protected intact; there is no dispute on that matter. However, the wretched cry of every child who was wrenched from their mother's arms has to echo today as a cry and a demand for what is right. The evidence must be preserved and protected and those whose story it tells - the most intimate and painful details of their lives - must have access to it.I find the Minister’s position this evening contradictory. He told us on the one hand that his Bill will not have the effect of sealing the archive for 30 years and then he went on to reiterate the position of the 2004 legislation in which he stated categorically that the records will remain sealed for a period of 30 years. Consequently, whatever the Minister’s intent, the net effect of his course of action is that these archives will be sealed for 30 years. He said that the entire process and those who came forward to tell stories and with information had a guarantee of privacy, and so they did, but nobody was guaranteed secrecy and he should not uphold that approach. The Minister said that victims, survivors and their families have what he called a legitimate expectation of access to important personal information. I put it to him that they have a legal entitlement to their personal information. I further put it to him that that entitlement is clearly and cogently set out in European law, which has primacy in these matters. He has not addressed that matter. I take particular issue with him saying that many of the records of the commission are copies of originals held by other institutions. Oh by God they are, and if the Minister only knew the hardship, the frustration and the heartache experienced not by a minority but by the vast majority of survivors as they seek those records. I assure him that if he really understood that he would not have presented legislation this evening.It seems to me that the Minister has advanced with this legislation without proper thought and certainly without proper consultation. He told us that Ireland has come a long way from the 1920s. I must tell him that when I was brought home to my house as a baby, we passed the Bethany Home. I was not born in the 1920s. Our last Magdalen laundry closed in the 1990s, so not alone is this not ancient history, this is very real, very recent history. This is the story of people's lives and the Minister has no right, and should not have the authority of this Oireachtas, to lock those files for the next 30 years. The legislation he needs to bring to us, which we will all welcome, is legislation that ensures privacy rights for sure and absolutely proper procedures but, above all else, the right and entitlement of those survivors to the records, the storybooks of their lives.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-10-20	---	1	"This morning, people woke up with a great sense of anxiety and uncertainty about the future. Last night's news that the State was to be moved to level 5 from midnight tomorrow until the end of November was the source of this uncertainty and anxiety. I understand fully that this was a hard decision for the Government. I also know that it is an even harder decision for all those who will bear the inevitable brunt of the hardship it will bring. It would be impossible today to overstate the level of concern and, in some cases, distress among our people.I fully accept that action had to be taken. There is no doubt that the virus is being transmitted exponentially. We now have six weeks to do the things I believe the Government should have done during the summer months, when we achieved a very low rate of transmission of Covid-19. At that time, through collective action and personal sacrifice, we suppressed the virus and, with the right plan, I am absolutely confident we can do it again. We must not, however, lose this second window of opportunity to build capacity and our defences for the time ahead. We need to see a plan, therefore, to increase hospital bed capacity and for the rapid recruitment of staff. We have to get testing and tracing right. We need a plan to ensure a secure and affordable roof over our people's heads, and we need to get things right as regards people coming onto the island through our airports and ports. It would be unthinkable if in six weeks we were to meet again not having responded to these challenges. We need a strategy that brings us beyond 2020. This must be an all-island strategy.I was taken aback by the Taoiseach's comments last night that seemed to suggest we will move in and out of lockdown for the duration of 2021. I would like him to clarify that point for us. A lot is being asked of people over the next six weeks. The Government absolutely cannot sleepwalk its way through this lockdown. Everything that needs to be done must be done to ensure we emerge stronger at every level.I welcome the fact that the Taoiseach has addressed his devastating cuts to the pandemic unemployment payment, PUP, and wage subsidy scheme. As he knows, we were very concerned that he did not do so in last week's budget. He now needs to make sure these payments do not leave anybody behind. One group that is struggling and has been left behind is mortgage holders. We argued very strongly that the mortgage payment breaks should have been extended for homeowners and businesses. That was at the end of September, just three short weeks ago, yet the Government failed to secure these protections. Now, three short weeks later, we are on the eve of a day when 200,000 will lose their jobs. Does the Taoiseach now accept that this was a very grave error in judgment on the part of his Government and, in particular, the Minister for Finance? Does he accept that this failure will have very serious implications for the credit ratings of tens of thousands of families and businesses? He could have done something about this but he failed to do so and that is shocking. He cannot blame people for believing the cosy relationship between his partner in government, Fine Gael, and the world of high finance was a key reason the Government sat on its hands and allowed this to occur.Who will be calling in the banks? Will the Taoiseach be in contact with them directly and will he make it clear to them that they must play ball in giving easement and breathing space to mortgage holders?The Taoiseach is right that the European Banking Authority did indeed oversee and supervise the regime for mortgage breaks. Under those rules, mortgage holders in Germany, Spain and Italy got payment breaks for 12 months. In this State, they got three months followed by another three months, which is six months in total and half the time allowed to mortgage holders in other jurisdictions. The Taoiseach knows as well as I do that an extension to the mortgage breaks had to be agreed and secured by 30 September. The Taoiseach knows and I know that the Ministers for Finance and Public Expenditure and Reform and the Tánaiste waltzed into a meeting with bankers on 28 September, had a conversation with them and there was no extension to mortgage breaks. That was three weeks ago. Now we are facing level 5 restrictions and 200,000 people will find themselves out of work. Those already out of work are reporting to us, to the Money Advice & Budgeting Service and to other authorities that the banks are not facilitating them and are not offering them alternative payment methods.In fact, they are saying to them, ""That is too bad. Your mortgage is not sustainable and we are offering you no alternative."" That is a recipe for repossession of people's homes.Having messed up disgracefully at the end of September by allowing the banks to return to business as usual, I am asking the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, to intervene now to make sure that the banks play ball and offer customers all the relevant options.The other jurisdictions offered breaks that were interest-free."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-10-14	---	1	What happened to women and children behind the high walls of Ireland's mother and baby homes casts a long and a dark shadow. For decades, these homes were shrouded in secrecy and the awful abuse of single mothers, the forced separation of families and the horrors of what happened in places like Tuam is still hard to comprehend. Those who survived these institutions, those who did not survive and their families are entitled to justice and to the truth.I am sure the Taoiseach received thousands of emails and letters from survivors and families regarding the fast-tracking through the Oireachtas this week of the Bill relating to their records. There are huge concerns over the lack of consultation regarding this Bill and there are serious questions as to the reason the Minister for Children, Disability, Equality and Integration, Deputy O'Gorman, is proceeding with this approach.The main concern is the intention of the Minister to transfer part of the commission of investigation's archive to Tusla without keeping a copy and a plan to seal the remainder of the archive for a period of 30 years. This will prevent people accessing their records from the Minister's archive and it will stop families accessing information about disappeared family members or babies buried in unmarked graves. I am sure the Taoiseach will agree that this is very wrong. It also means that all the information, the files and the records that show how abusive the system was will be withheld from the very people who are entitled to the truth.The role of the State and the Government should be to remove the veil of secrecy surrounding mother and baby homes, not to reinforce it. The Minister, Deputy O'Gorman, has yet to credibly explain why he is taking these actions. He says that it is a requirement under the legislation to preserve access to valuable information and evidence but that is not correct. There is no legal obligation under the 2004 Commissions of Investigation Act on the Minister to seal these records thereby preventing people accessing their information. In fact, the Commissions of Investigation Act enables the commission to deposit these records with the Minister for children on its dissolution. It is also not credible for the Minister to suggest that allowing survivors and families access to their records could in any way impede or undermine the operation of the commission. In fact, as the Taoiseach well knows, under data protection legislation survivors have the right to access their own data. Surely allowing people to access their information and records serves only to advance the cause of truth and justice. Rather than being bound to secrecy, the Oireachtas could legislate to unseal records and evidence gathered by the commission.The proposed legislation needs to be scrapped. The Minister needs to produce an anonymised index of the records held. He needs to consult with survivors and their advocates and then draft the appropriate legislation that meets the needs and rights of survivors and the moral obligations of the State. That is the right thing to do.Provision should also be made to enable survivors decide how to handle their records in the future. There is also a need for a dedicated archive to be set up at Sean MacDermott Street. I believe there is great merit in that proposal.I believe that everyone in this House wants to see justice and truth for those women and children of the mother and baby homes. However, the Minister is doing the wrong thing and he is causing enormous alarm and great upset. I ask the Taoiseach to intervene immediately and that we would work together across the House to resolve this very important matter.We all share the Taoiseach’s view and all of us find it difficult to reconcile that Ireland, not in the dim and distant past but in the recent past, was such a hostile place for vulnerable women and their children. I said in my opening remarks that that is a shared view and the correct view. This, therefore, is not simply data. This is information and testimony that relates, as the Taoiseach set out, to real living people who have been traumatised and are on a journey in search of information and truth. They are in search of their own information, their own story, the stories of their love ones and, in some cases, the story of children that never emerged from these institutions and were buried in mass graves. We all know that.The truth is the Minister has not engaged with the survivors. He has not engaged with their advocates. The truth is also that access for those people and their families has to be a tantamount concern of the State so the notion of sealing these records for 30 years, a time span in which surely many survivors of the mother and baby homes will have gone to their great reward and will never find the full truth and have access to their records, is unconscionable. Rather than defending this legislation, which the survivors, their advocates and their legal advisers all agree is unnecessary, unwarranted and causing distress, I ask the Taoiseach that we operate on a cross-party basis to resolve this matter to the satisfaction of the survivors in line with legal obligations. The Minister does not have to act as he is acting and I appeal to the Taoiseach to take a wider perspective.The Taoiseach is attacking me, actually.He is being very aggressive and it is entirely unnecessary.The Taoiseach should go back and listen to himself.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-10-07	---	1	"Covid has had a devastating impact on services for people with disabilities and dementia. Many people who were receiving a full week's support prior to the pandemic are now only receiving one or two days of services per week. The sector has warned that this is because it does not have the additional funding to restore services to full capacity with the Covid protocols in place. Last night, the Opposition tabled a cross-party motion to ensure that these services are able to reopen fully and offer the support that is due to our citizens with disabilities, their families, their carers and others who provide the services.I have been contacted by hundreds of families who have spoken of their frustration and distress as they have seen their loved ones regress and deteriorate without these services. I have no doubt that Deputies across the House have had similar conversations over the past few months. The scale of this crisis was reflected in the debate last evening where Deputies, including Government Deputies, expressed their genuine concerns. Many families have asked me to share their experiences and stories with the Taoiseach, and so I will.One mother tells it as follows:Everybody seems to have forgotten the children and adults who have disabilities. They have been left at home with no consistency or backup. As a parent of an adult daughter with disabilities, I have found it really challenging and wanted to run away at times, but could never do it. But having nothing to look forward to is working backwards for us. She has nothing to occupy her or no possibility of seeing her friends or anyone she can identify with. I've found it hard but she can't put her feelings into words to explain how she is. And I'd say every parent or carer feels the same. We're all but forgotten about.Another says: ""We are on the floor. They aren't helping us family carers or our children or adults with disabilities whatsoever.""Another person writes: ""Vulnerable people with disabilities and their carers need supports. We are on the ledge at this stage and we feel very neglected by this government.""Another mother says:My son turns thirty next year. His whole life has been a constant battle with governments and the HSE for basic supports. As parents, we are constantly fighting for supports and funding. It is draining but it looks like I will again have to fight non-stop to get my son the services he needs.Another writes:Lost, abandoned, confused and frustrated is what my son and I feel on a daily basis. He is still at home since the 12th of March. I’ve watched him regress. His anxiety and frustration rise to levels I’ve never seen before. His world is standing still and is nothing changing. We need support and life to resume.Another person told me: ""It was extremely difficult emotionally and physically ever before Covid-19 but now we are on our knees altogether.""To sum up, another said: ""Those with disabilities and their families are being swept under the carpet. We are the forgotten people of the Pandemic.""That makes for hard reading and for hard listening but that is it; the unvarnished reality of people's lives without these services. They are ""on the ledge"", ""on the floor"", and on their knees. It is now time for the Government to step up and do what is right. I listened to the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, and to Deputy Michael Moynihan, as they described how they have to fight for every cent of funding for disability services. It should not be so.I appeal to the Taoiseach that we would work together on this issue, all of us - the Government and the Opposition - to ensure that disability services get the adequate funding that they require in the budget next week.There is an absolute desperation in the experiences that I have shared with the House. The forgotten people of this pandemic are ""on the ledge"", ""on the floor"", ""on our knees"". This is how citizens with disabilities, their families, carers and service providers feel. The moneys that have been allocated are just not enough. I raise this, not to have an argument with the Taoiseach but out of a sense of desperation because of the desperation of citizens with disabilities, the sons and daughters of the people whose experiences I recounted. What are we doing if we cannot cater for that now? There has been a lot of talk about whether we are in this together. This is the litmus test. I think the Taoiseach and I can agree on that. I appeal to the Taoiseach-----I appeal to the Taoiseach that we do not see again crumbs from the table when budget day comes. The case has been made to the HSE. The business cases, as they are called, have been lodged. A very full explanation of what is needed has been made. I ask the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, on all of our behalf, to make sure that on budget day those very resources are delivered."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-10-07	---	2	Today is day one of level 3 across the State and we have news of significant outbreaks of Covid-19 in nursing homes in Portlaoise and in Donegal. What happened in our nursing homes last spring was a scandal that cannot be repeated. Are our nursing homes prepared now for this second wave of Covid-19? Is there a plan and, if so, can the Taoiseach share it with us?I heard with great concern the remarks of Dr. Dee in respect of the regional public health departments and the fact that they are desperately struggling to keep up with demand. I have raised the issue of testing and tracing with the Taoiseach time out of number and time out of number he has told me that that is properly resourced, when patently and clearly it is not. What is the plan to get this right and, above all, what is the plan to protect residents and staff in our nursing homes?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-10-06	---	1	Yesterday was a critical day in our fight against Covid-19. The Taoiseach and I spoke yesterday afternoon as he considered the public health advice from the National Public Health Emergency Team, NPHET. I am glad the Taoiseach also spoke to Michelle O'Neill and Arlene Foster about strengthening the all-Ireland approach. There is no doubt that the decision facing Government yesterday was hugely challenging. It has decided not to implement the NPHET recommendation to move to level 5 and instead we will move to level 3 from midnight tonight. The truth is that a move to level 5 now would have proven catastrophic for workers, families and businesses. I say this because the Government has cut the supports and protections that they need simply to survive and get by. I was very alarmed by the aggressive approach taken by the Tánaiste on RTÉ last night. Governments ask for advice and, when given advice, they should accept it with some level of maturity and grace and then make their decision. The NPHET recommendation comes against a backdrop of very high levels of community transmission and, critically, very low capacity within our health service. NPHET is worried and it is right to be worried. Listening to the Tánaiste last night, one would never think he had been Minister for Health, much less that he and his party had been leading Government for the past decade or, indeed, that he joined with the Taoiseach in cutting supports like the pandemic unemployment payment, PUP, that people rely on.The vulnerabilities that we now face are down to the Taoiseach and his partner in government, Deputy Varadkar. In 2009, we had 289 intensive care beds. More than a decade on, we have 280. We have fewer intensive care beds now than we had more than a decade ago. This represents a decade of failure from Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael. It is on them. Last night, as the Cabinet had come to its decision, there were only 39 adult intensive care beds available. That is the situation we face and it is a troubling one. Along with testing and tracing, capacity in our hospitals is perhaps the most important measure to protect us from going into very severe lockdowns. It is how we ensure that non-Covid care is not suspended again with the terrible impacts that has. It is how we will keep our schools, economy and society open during this pandemic. When we spoke yesterday, I asked the Taoiseach to provide assurances that we were winter ready, in other words, that we have the necessary supplies of personal protective equipment, PPE, testing kits, reagent, laboratory spaces and ventilators to deal with the second surge. He could not give me that assurance. I find that very worrying given the rate of infection in the community, the resurgence of the virus in nursing homes and the increase in people over the age of 65 contracting this virus.It seems that the Government does not have its eye on the ball and does not have a grasp on what is needed to ensure people can live safely alongside the virus. This came across strongly in what the Tánaiste had to say last night. He expressed his concern about mental health, isolation and poverty. If the Government is really concerned about these things then take action next week in the budget.Is the Taoiseach concerned at the lack of capacity in intensive care? Does he accept that we now need to urgently increase ICU capacity as we enter winter in this pandemic?The Government cut the pandemic unemployment payment and the wage subsidy. That is the reality. For all of those in low-paid work to whom the Taoiseach referred, and who he correctly said are disproportionately affected by a very severe lockdown, let me tell him that the fact the Government cut these important supports looms large and is to the forefront of their thoughts when there is any talk of a complete lockdown, because those are the supports they rely on to pay their bills and to live.The Taoiseach said the Government has to foresee all eventualities. I absolutely agree with him. More is the pity that back in 2009, when we had 289 intensive care beds and when we knew at that stage that that was grossly insufficient, he and others in government did not have the foresight to plan for proper capacity. The truth is this. We are now reaping the harvest of more than a decade of underinvestment in our public health system. The truth is that we do not have the necessary capacity to reassure the public and even to reassure NPHET that we can make it through the autumn and winter months. Does the Taoiseach accept that we need to increase intensive care capacity? What will he do now to make that happen?That was with no other care in the system.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-30	---	1	This morning, the Economic and Social Research Institute, ESRI, released an important paper on the impact of Covid-19 on the housing supply. It argues that the pandemic will result in a drop in the private sector supply of new homes. This will further widen the gap between supply and demand, making housing even more unaffordable for working people. The ESRI's central recommendation is commonsensical and crystal clear - the State must increase the supply of social and affordable homes. This is the only way to deliver homes more cheaply and efficiently.Yesterday, the Residential Tenancies Board, RTB, published its latest rent report. Despite Covid-19, rents remain unacceptably high. Throughout the State, they have risen by almost 2% since last June. Outside Dublin and the commuter belt, the increase was in excess of 3%. Too many people are trapped in a rental market with sky-high prices. They are put to the pin of their collars with extortionate rents stifling their potential and impacting on their ability to deal with the pandemic.Last month, Daft.ie released its latest price report. Now, the average house price in Dublin is a staggering €380,000. Even a couple on good incomes are unable to afford a home in Dublin at such prices.Gheall an Taoiseach go gcuirfeadh an Rialtas seo tithe inacmhainne ar fáil do dhaoine atá ag obair. Le linn an toghcháin i bhFeabhra, ba í an tithíocht an cheist ba mhó a bhí ann. Tá an iomarca daoine gafa i margadh cíosa le praghsanna ag ardú i gcónaí. The Taoiseach promised that the Government would deliver affordable homes for working people. During the election in February, housing was the main issue on the doorstep. People were crying out for affordable homes, with families left behind because of the failure of successive Governments to deliver.If we ever needed a reminder of the importance of a stable roof over our heads, the pandemic has provided it. During the pandemic, people's homes have truly become their sanctuaries. If the Ireland that emerges after this crisis is to be in any way fair and one that gives people a decent chance and a fresh start, we have to get housing right. Decent, affordable and secure housing is the bedrock on which decent lives are built.Despite all of the promises made by Fianna Fáil during the election, the sluggish approach of the Government to get to grips with housing is astonishing. The Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Darragh O'Brien, spent the entire summer telling everyone that the Government's housing plan was on the way. On 7 July, he said that he would announce details of the new affordable scheme in September. On 9 July, he reiterated this on Newstalk and said that new affordable housing regulations would be ready to launch by September. On 12 July, he told  that new affordable home targets would be set out in September. Speaking in opposition to our motion on affordable housing in July, he again promised to announce the details of his new scheme in September.Today is the last day of September. Hundreds of thousands of working people want to know where the Government's affordable housing plan is and why the Minister has not kept his and the Taoiseach's promise to launch the plan this month.Níl aon phlean ag an Taoiseach. Is í sin an fhírinne. Tá a lán le rá aige ach níl aon phlean aige. He cited the extraordinary income support measures that were introduced by Government. Of course, the Government has cut the pandemic unemployment payment and the wage subsidy and it has left tens of thousands of the lowest income workers out of the schemes. Please do not brag or hide behind those initiatives.We were promised and the people were promised a scheme and a plan for affordable housing. We were promised we would see it in September but we have not seen it yet. To judge by the Taoiseach's response, I can only conclude that no such plan exists. If it does, will he tell us whether it is the Government's intention to publish it today? This policy of ,  and putting everything on the long finger seems to be one of the hallmarks of this chaotic Government, but it is not good enough. It is not good enough for people who, as we speak, do not have a secure roof over their heads, people who worry about rent, people who are in an extraordinarily difficult and precarious position, people who live in the box room of their mother's home, sometimes with their own children. ,  is not good enough. Talk and sound are not good enough from the Taoiseach or the Minister. Has the Taoiseach an affordable housing plan? Where is the plan? We have not seen it in September. When will we finally see a plan for affordable housing?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-30	---	2	Yesterday, at 6.30 in the morning, Derryroe Limited, a development company, bulldozed No. 40 Herbert Park. This was the home of The O’Rahilly, who was killed in action during the 1916 Rising. As the Taoiseach knows, he was the leader of the Irish Volunteers and the campaign to save this house in which he lived received very widespread and deserved support right across the public. Key meetings in regard to the Easter Rising took place at No. 40 Herbert Park, so it was a place of major significance.Earlier this month, Dublin city councillors voted in support of a Sinn Féin motion to add this building to the list of protected structures. For the developers to raze the building to the ground, particularly in the knowledge that decision had been taken by Dublin City Council, is truly reprehensible. It is a grubby and calculated act of bad faith by the developers. I understand that Dublin City Council is currently investigating the matter. Is the Government, and the Minister with responsibility for culture and her Department, assisting in this investigation?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-29	---	1	Yesterday was a very bad day for tens of thousands of families and businesses that need breathing space in respect of their mortgages. The announcement that mortgage breaks will come to an end after this week has caused a great deal of anxiety and stress. These mortgage breaks gave homeowners and businesses some relief as the economic effects of the emergency and public health restrictions bit hard. Nobody expected the mortgage breaks to go on forever but they should certainly have been maintained for as long as the pandemic continued. In other countries, mortgage holders have been given breaks of nine months or even a year but that is not the case here. Here, mortgage holders got a break of three months followed by an extension lasting a further three months.Yesterday, we learnt that the banks will return to business as usual but it is not a case of business as usual for many families and businesses. There are families and businesses that will simply not be able to return to repaying their mortgages normally. Leaving mortgage holders to go it alone and relying on the sympathy of the banks to deal with individual cases is, frankly, unacceptable.Yesterday's meeting between senior Government Ministers and the banks was a facade. There was no real intent on the part of the Government to reach a solution that would help mortgage holders. All of this is happening at a time when the cosy connections between the Government and the financial sector are once again on show. We have learnt that the former Minister of State, Senator Michael D'Arcy, is leaving the Seanad to be appointed as CEO of a financial lobbying group. In summary, all of this means that there will be no relief for struggling mortgage holders but a big job for a former Minister of State. What does this say to the families and businesses that were relying on the Government to stand up for them and to go to bat for them? This is the second former Minister of State at the Department of Finance to go through the revolving door from the Government into the world of high finance. In fact, during yesterday's meeting, Ministers from the Taoiseach's Government sat on one side of the table while a former Minister of State at the Department of Finance sat on the other side representing the banks.The Tánaiste, Deputy Varadkar, has warmly welcomed Senator D'Arcy's new job. He said that he understands why, after 20 years in public life, the Senator might wish to start a new chapter in his life. He said that he will always be welcome should he decide to run for election again. He went on to say that his new employers are fortunate to recruit someone of his calibre.The Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, another of the Taoiseach's colleagues in government, said something different. He said that he has concerns about all of this and that he has shared those concerns with the Taoiseach. We know that the Standards in Public Office Commission, SIPO, has certainly had concerns about this revolving door. Over the last five years, it has approached the Government to seek changes to legislation that would give it the power to investigate and prosecute Ministers who do not adhere to the rules on cooling-off periods before moving to jobs with lobbying groups. SIPO's approaches in this regard have been consistently ignored by the Government. One has to wonder why.The Tánaiste has one point of view of the appointment. The Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, has a different point of view. He says he has concerns and that he has shared these concerns with the Taoiseach. Will the Taoiseach set out for us his position on this matter? Does the Taoiseach share the concerns of the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan? If he does, what are those concerns? What action, as Head of Government, does the Taoiseach propose to take on this matter?Tea and sympathy for mortgage holders is of no use to them. Of course, some will be in a position to return to full payment of their mortgage sum but many others will not. The question is why the mortgage breaks were stopped for families and businesses that still require them at a time when we are still in the grip of a public emergency, when additional restrictions have been placed on Dublin and Donegal, and when there is the very real prospect that will happen elsewhere throughout the country. That is the issue. The Government left this matter until the eleventh hour and demonstrated no serious intent to secure a continuation of those very necessary and invaluable, as the Taoiseach called them, arrangements for mortgage holders.My colleagues, Deputies Pearse Doherty and Mairéad Farrell, have prepared legislation that will be published today in respect of reform of SIPO powers, particularly in terms of section 22, and allowing SIPO to investigate and make concrete sanctions against former Ministers or Ministers of State such as Senator D'Arcy, who has moved through that revolving door from politics to lobbying. The Taoiseach should remember that last week, Senator D'Arcy was on his feet in the Seanad, addressing issues very close to the financial services industry and of great interest to investment managers. This week, we learned that he is moving, changing and going to be a CEO for one of these organisations.I am glad the Taoiseach has agreed the law needs to be changed. We do not need a lengthy review; we need this change to happen quickly. We are happy to provide the legislation and I hope the Government will support it.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-23	---	1	"The Irish Congress of Trade Unions, ICTU, has withdrawn from the Low Pay Commission. Its general secretary, Patricia King, stated that it did so because the commission was not prepared to go beyond an increase of 1% in the minimum wage for 2021. A 1% increase would mean an increase of 10 cent an hour for the workers affected - the thousands of low-paid workers who have kept us going during this pandemic. Overnight, when the going got tough, many of those workers were classified as essential. When the chips were down it was not to the high rollers, bankers, corporate landlords or millionaire executives that we turned; no, in our time of need, it was to retail workers who stock our shelves, delivery van drivers, supply chain workers, carers and cleaners that we turned.These workers were essential, these workers are essential and these workers have always been essential. They were commended and cheered, but they cannot feed their children with applause and flowery rhetoric. They rely on a meaningful increase in the minimum wage to pay their bills, rents and mortgages. Those workers need decent pay - a fair day's pay for a fair day's work. There is something very wrong when members of a Low Pay Commission cannot agree to a meaningful increase for low paid workers, workers who were rightly described as heroes only a few short weeks ago.One in five workers is a low-paid worker in Ireland, and 100,000 people at work live in poverty. That is the reality. The Taoiseach and his Government have turned their backs on these workers. The new employment wage subsidy scheme, EWSS, locks 153,000 of the lowest paid workers out and the Government has been put at risk of losing their jobs. It has left their employers in a terrible position, because they do not have the money or resources to pay the very modest wages. The Government, therefore, has hurt not only low-paid workers but also businesses. The pandemic unemployment payment, PUP, has also been cut, a move certain to drive more workers and households into debt and distress, and this has been done at a time tens of thousands of workers remain out of work because of the Covid-19 crisis.To summarise the situation, since 1 September, over the past three weeks, the Government has locked 153,000 of the lowest paid workers out of the EWSS, the PUP has been cut for those losing their jobs because of Government-imposed public health restrictions, and now we have a Low Pay Commission that will not deal with low pay. Is this the Taoiseach's version of ""we are all in this together""? I ask that because it strikes me that all this has the fingerprints of the Tánaiste and Minister for Business, Enterprise and Innovation, Deputy Varadkar, and Fine Gael all over it. What does the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, propose to do to reverse these absolutely disastrous decisions that will injure and hurt low-paid workers and their families?The only thing that is extraordinary is the Taoiseach's extraordinary lack of fairness and his even more extraordinary lack of self-awareness in this regard. Let us rehearse the facts again. The Government's new wage subsidy scheme excludes 153,000 workers who earn €151 a week or less. They are not eligible and are excluded from the scheme. That hurts those workers, it hurts their employers and the Government has left them out in the cold, very deliberately. That is a fact. The Government has also cut the PUP, so another 150,000 or more workers are down €50 or €100 a week. That is also a fact. That hurts those workers and their families, and now we have a Low Pay Commission that is not minded to deal in any acceptable way with the issue of low pay.Does the Taoiseach, therefore, agree with ICTU that the minimum increase to the minimum wage ought to be 20 cent an hour or more? Will he move beyond his sort of delusional reverie and into the real world with us and address those low-paid workers excluded from the Government's wage subsidy scheme and those who will be hurt by the changes to PUP? Will the Taoiseach tell those workers how he is going to correct for those very bad decisions?On a point of order, the Taoiseach has responded in the manner he has. I just have to say-----I know that we do not have a fact-checking facility for the Oireachtas but the facts that I set out about the wage subsidy scheme and the pandemic unemployment payment----------are accurate and I would like that recorded on the record of the Dáil. I do not appreciate being accused of laying untruths before the House. That is not true."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-23	---	2	Yesterday, I raised with the Taoiseach the very real sense of abandonment that citizens with disabilities and their families, carers and service providers feel. I asked him to commit to ring-fencing the necessary funding to ensure that services get back up and running to capacity. The Taoiseach cited, of course, the Covid-19 protocols, which I recognise. More importantly, the services, the sector, the families and the individuals with disabilities themselves recognise that those protocols have to be abided by and respected. However, that means the money has to be committed. The winter plan is to be published and the Taoiseach needs to make a commitment now in respect of that necessary funding. The Disability Federation of Ireland states that €120 million is required. I would like the Taoiseach to put people’s minds at ease, bring clarity and commit to ring-fencing and delivering that funding.What about County Monaghan?The Taoiseach has no answer. It would be nice to share it.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-22	---	1	"Go raibh maith agat, a Cheann Comhairle.Restrictions for Dublin city and county were announced on Friday, including restrictions on bars and restaurants banning indoor dining. This particular measure came as a shock. People did not see it coming. According to the Restaurants Association of Ireland it has resulted in tens of thousands of workers being laid off.It is now clear that the Government’s strategy to deal with this pandemic will involve periods of intensifying restrictions and then relaxing them. For this to be a successful approach we need very clear communication and to understand that it means no surprises at the eleventh hour. Above all the Taoiseach needs to ensure that the State and his Government provide the necessary supports for families, for workers and for individuals who find themselves out of work at very short notice because of public health measures.Last week the Government went ahead with a very mean cut to the pandemic unemployment payment and now more than 156,000 people who were in receipt of €350 a week will see a reduction in their payment of between €50 and €100. This cut happened precisely 24 hours before the Taoiseach announced these further restrictions on Dublin.I am also absolutely astounded and gobsmacked at media reports that his Government approved this morning the hiring of ten special advisers for junior Ministers, this being done at a time when he is cutting payments to people in real difficulty who have lost their jobs. If this is the case it is outrageous and I ask him to clarify this matter.At a time when sectors of the economy are still closed down or are vulnerable to being closed down again, when thousands of people are out of work, this is not a time to be cutting the very payment upon which they rely to pay their bills and look after their families. This decision needs to be reviewed immediately and reversed.The Taoiseach also scrapped the eviction ban in August.He replaced it with very weak legislation that provides nothing like the kinds of protections of the original ban and, consequently, has left thousands of renters exposed. He needs to revisit this decision also and reintroduce the original ban on evictions as a matter of urgency.There are also some 37,000 households whose mortgage payment break is due to end in the coming days and many thousands of businesses are in the same boat. This will undoubtedly cause huge hardship for families and businesses up and down the land. If a further extension of these payment breaks is not granted before 30 September, these families and businesses will fall into default unless they are in a position to meet their full mortgage repayment. Banks and lending institutions need to act now to ensure that these 37,000 families, and businesses, are not plunged into further financial hardship. Deputy Martin is the Taoiseach and he needs to act on this matter because the real danger we face now is that people become more terrified of losing their job, their home and not being able to provide for their family than they are of the virus. That would be the worst possible situation we could walk into.In terms of my asks, I want a reverse to the cut in the pandemic unemployment payment, PUP, a reinstatement of the ban on evictions and the extension of mortgage breaks without interest. The Taoiseach said correctly that we all have to play our part. I agree with him but the State has to lead from the front.The facts are these: we are now living with an ongoing crisis, there are tens of thousands of people who have not worked since March and there are thousands across the city and county of Dublin who got laid off on Friday. The very idea of reducing the payment for these workers at a time when interventions for public health are being made is absolutely extraordinary. The payment of €350 is not a fortune. There is nobody sitting in this Chamber who is on €350 per week. I dare say that the ten special advisers for the Taoiseach's junior Ministers will be paid an awful lot more than €350 per week. Therefore, I am asking him to play his part as Head of Government and for the State to lead from the front. I want him to revisit the decision to cut the pandemic unemployment payment. I want him to reinstate it to its original rate in recognition of the fact that people may well be in and out of employment for quite an extended period.The Taoiseach claimed he cannot reinstate the ban on evictions because of some constitutional complication.""Some constitutional complication"" is now null and void, as demonstrated from Friday when emergency provisions were reinstated in the city. The Taoiseach knows full well he can reinstate the full ban on evictions and notices to quit.If he has read the evidence, he will know the initiative had a huge effect on dampening down homelessness numbers at the time in question. The Taoiseach should support working families and do the right thing.There are 14 of them.There are 14 in the entire-----No, it is not."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-16	---	1	"I take this opportunity to offer my sincere condolences to the family and friends of the jockey Pat Smullen. His death has brought deep sadness to the horse-racing community and, indeed, far beyond that.As we all know, Pat fought his own battle with pancreatic cancer but he also raised more than €2.5 million for treatment and research into that disease. It is fair to say that Ireland has lost a champion both on and off the racecourse. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam.Yesterday was billed as the day to bring clarity and forward planning. Instead what we got was chaos, confusion and very considerable anxiety for people. I am glad the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, tested negative for Covid-19. I am also glad that he got that result within a matter of hours. It has to be said that experience does not tally with people more widely across society. I make that point because 24-hour turnaround of results has to become the universal standard for everyone in society.Last April, the Taoiseach's colleagues in government, Deputies Leo Varadkar and Simon Harris, told us that we would reach 100,000 tests per week. The Taoiseach will know that the Covid committee made a recommendation on the advice of experts that 24-hour turnaround for results would be achieved and observed. Months later, neither of those two important commitments have been met. Disappointingly, the Government's very lengthy plan announced yesterday was very sketchy in respect of testing and tracing. It provides no concrete targets or delivery plans in this area. I emphasise ""this area"" to amplify the basic public health advice, which is that to deal with this crisis, to get ahead of this virus, to flatten the curve and to keep it flattened we must test, trace and isolate. That is what the World Health Organization tells us and it is correct. In that spirit, when will we get to 100,000 tests per day? What is the target beyond that because 100,000 will not be sufficient? As I said, the all-party committee recommended 24-hour turnaround for results. When will we reach that target? Can the Taoiseach clarify those matters for the Dáil this morning because we need to get this basic central element right.I am glad that we are back in the Dáil following yesterday's shambles. The public was left with a real sense of unease seeing the Cabinet being unable to work and the Dáil suspended. People have lost confidence in the Government's handling of this emergency, not least here in Dublin, where it has left people hanging in a very cruel limbo. It is not just that people are confused, they are beside themselves. There are people whose businesses are hanging by a thread, people whose jobs are in the balance and people who want to have social contact with friends and family. There is no clarity yet as to whether people can come and go from this city. The message from the press conference was that people should not move outside of Dublin. The Minister, Deputy Donnelly, said the opposite and then the Taoiseach was unclear last evening on RTÉ. This morning, again, we had two senior Ministers, Deputies O'Donohoe and Michael McGrath, contradicting each other within a matter of hours. It is an absolute mess. The Taoiseach needs to be straight with the people of Dublin. He needs to tell them what exactly we are facing. We need that clarity and certainty now. Can the Taoiseach provide that clarity? What are the current restrictions and will we be facing further restrictions when NPHET meets or when the new committee meets? Will the Taoiseach commit, as I have asked, to ramping up seriously, in a concrete way, our testing and tracing capabilities?The Taoiseach may have heard Dublin-based GPs this morning on the media setting out their concerns around the delays in accessing tests and the further delays in results being returned. He may choose to adopt a defensive posture and to attack me but I am working on the supposition that he will take the word of medical professionals who are not inventing these scenarios. These are doctors who deal with patients who present when they are sick, as I did. I had this experience.They are not in the habit of making up things. The only people engaging in wishful thinking, it seems, is the Taoiseach and his Government.I want to know when we will get to 100,000 tests per week. I have my app here and it reflects the testing done over the past seven days. We are way short of that number. It was the same last week, the week before and the week before that. The Government made the commitment of 100,000 tests per week so when we will it reach that number?There is also the matter of the 24-hour turnaround in testing. As for Dublin, the Taoiseach's words today add to the confusion and anxiety across the county.NPHET gave information and advice to the Government and it was put into the public domain. All the Taoiseach has achieved is confusion and he has not been on his own, as other Ministers have also caused confusion. The Taoiseach should clarify matters now by precisely and succinctly setting out the travel advice for people in Dublin.Deputy Martin is the Taoiseach and should set it out. His Ministers do not know it.The community does not know it. The Taoiseach is the head of the Government so instead of snapping at me he should do his job and set out the information.It is also not 100,000.Will he state it again?I did not have to. The Government has done it by itself.I am not.No. Testing and tracing is the core of this."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-16	---	2	Two weeks ago, I raised the issue of proposed increases in utility prices and I set out for the Taoiseach the considerable pressure that workers and their families are under. I asked the Taoiseach at that time to intervene with Electric Ireland regarding its forthcoming price hike and he stated that he would do so. I also asked the Taoiseach to put a stop to the 100% hike in the public service obligation, PSO, levy levied by the Government because this will also have the effect of increasing prices. I wrote to the Taoiseach seeking an update on what actions he has taken on these matters but I have not received a reply. Will the Taoiseach tell me now whether he has engaged with Electric Ireland as promised, will there be a stop put to the proposed price hikes forthcoming in October, and if he has withdrawn or will withdraw his proposed hike in the public service levy?Did Electric Ireland tell the Taoiseach that?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-15	---	1	Public confidence in the Taoiseach's ability to manage the Covid-19 crisis has collapsed in recent months. Today, the Taoiseach promised clarity but instead we have had further confusion. Dublin is left in limbo, our citizens over the age of 70 are left without necessary guidance, and travel advice is confused and unsure again. Most striking is the absence of any comprehensive plan to step up testing and tracing capacity. The Taoiseach and I both know that some people are waiting for results of their tests in some cases for six or seven days. It is this inefficiency that allows the virus to take hold and to transmit across our communities.The Taoiseach has again today made an appeal to individual citizens to shoulder their responsibilities, which is fair enough. The fact is, however, that the Taoiseach is failing in his. The Government can publish any plans it wants but they are not worth the paper they are written on so long as our testing and tracing capacities are so woefully inadequate. The Taoiseach has to get this right. A first-class testing and tracing system is the springboard for everything we want to see. It is the sure mechanism to allow people to return to work and stay at work safely and to allow children and students return to education and stay there safely. It is also essential to ensure our health system does not become overwhelmed at a time when trolley figures are creeping back up and waiting lists of outpatient appointments are at record levels. The truth is that the Taoiseach and his predecessor, Deputy Varadkar, have failed to put in place the testing and tracing system we need, which is the carrying out of at least 100,000 tests a week with a guaranteed result within 24 hours. We hear stories of people constantly waiting longer than that.Let it be said that the Taoiseach and the Minister, Deputy Varadkar, have had numerous opportunities to put in place this testing and tracing system. In April, the Taoiseach's now Cabinet colleagues, the Ministers, Deputies Varadkar and Harris, said they would be doing 100,000 tests a day by mid-May. We are now in September and that target has not been reached. Back in May the then Taoiseach dismissed my call for these 100,000 tests a week, and he did so in a very arrogant and condescending manner. The occasion of the publication of the reopening roadmap was another chance to get testing and tracing right, but this did not happen. The Taoiseach formed his Government at the end of June and again it was a prime opportunity to get things right and to put an emphasis on testing and tracing. The Taoiseach failed again.Infection rates dropped over the course of the summer and the Government was again presented with an opportunity to get this right but it did not do so and now the virus has caught up with us. The people in Kildare, Laois and Offaly have already paid a very heavy price for the Government's failure and now the people of Dublin face further restrictions and more disruption to their lives. The growing rates of infection and this disruption are directly related to the Government's failure to get things right.Amid all the bluster and the very long press conference the Taoiseach hosted earlier today, there is on inescapable truth; either we get testing and tracing right and do it quickly or we will be consigned to a yo-yo effect of further restrictions and even lockdowns. I have no doubt that citizens will carry the burden of their responsibilities but the Government must also measure up to its responsibilities.It seems to me that the Taoiseach is making it up as he goes along. If the Government was serious about protecting public health, employment and people's quality of life, it would measure up to a commitment made months ago that 100,000 tests would be carried out per week and that people would be in receipt of their results within 24 hours.I have the Covid app on my phone. It might interest the Taoiseach to know that over the past seven days, fewer than 75,000 tests were carried out. This is months on from a commitment to hit the target of 100,000 tests. To keep people safe, to keep the economy on track, to ensure that we have some quality of life, including social opportunities, it is my view that we need more than 100,000 tests per week, but the Government has not yet even reached that target.The truth is that when trouble flared in the midlands because of meat processing plants, and when numbers started to climb, by the Taoiseach's own admission and by his own Minister's admission, they did not have the testing and tracing capacity to catch up and there was a huge time lag. It is very telling that, in today's plan that the Taoiseach has issued, of 59 pages, just one of them addresses the issue of testing and tracing - the most central part of the plan and the Taoiseach has failed. I have to say to him that people in Dublin in particular today, but also throughout the State, are frustrated with the Taoiseach's inability to see the most basic thing, which is to get testing and tracing right and then allow us the opportunity for all else to follow.I am glad the Taoiseach is on the ball on something.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-09	---	1	I raise with the Taoiseach the issue of the British Government's clear intention to renege on the Irish protocol. As the Taoiseach will know, the protocol was secured after a very long negotiation. It represents the bare minimum required to protect Irish interests. It is essential to protect our economy, to ensure no hardening of the Border on our island and to ensure our peace agreements are protected. As the Taoiseach will also know, it is binding under international law.Today, legislation will be published. The British Secretary of State for Northern Ireland has made very clear that this legislation will breach international law. In other words, the British system is now breaching international law with its eyes wide open and is making no secret of that fact. It is interesting and should be noted that the secretary of state has managed to speak out of both sides of his mouth on this issue. On Monday evening, he met with my colleague, Ms Michelle O'Neill, the joint Head of Government in the North, and sought to assure her that the legislation would in no way interfere with the protocol. He then took to his feet on Tuesday and said the precise opposite. As the Taoiseach knows, he has conceded that the British Government will in fact act to breach international law.All of this demonstrates how far Mr. Boris Johnson's government is prepared to go to satisfy his Tory Brexiteers and, frankly, his own blunt English nationalism. It should be recorded that the British Prime Minister was the champion of Brexit. The Taoiseach may also recall that he was also an advocate of a no-deal proposition. He had to be dragged to any meaningful negotiation by his own parliament. In the past, I have described his approach and position as stupid and dangerous. I reiterate that today; the position of Mr. Johnson and his government is both stupid and dangerous. It is very clear that perfidious Albion is alive and well and living at No. 10 Downing Street.The British Prime Minister believes that it will either be his way or no way. He mistakenly believes he can now pressure or bully Ireland. It needs to be made very clear to him that is not going to happen. I take some heart from the international reaction, not least from the statements of Congressman Richard Neal, chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means, and others.This story broke on Sunday night; it is now Wednesday. I am alarmed that it has taken this long for the Taoiseach to indicate that he will intervene with the British Prime Minister. I appreciate and understand the value of diplomatic back channels but, in this instance, it falls to the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, to defend and represent Irish interests. When he takes the phone call with the British Prime Minister - I assume the call will be made today but the Taoiseach might clarify that - will he make it absolutely clear that there can and will be no reneging on the Irish protocol and no return to a hard border on our island and that the Good Friday Agreement will be upheld in all of its parts?Anyone who has even a passing interest in British Governments, but particularly those of a Tory variety, will understand that this is not a new departure. Sadly, it is not a new departure for Boris Johnson and his administration to walk away from prior commitments, including those held within international treaties. In this instance, the protocol is a settled matter and the withdrawal agreement is a settled matter. It is connected to but very much distinct from the negotiations that will, as the Taoiseach said, go on between Britain and the European institutions. I am a bit concerned, first, at the slowness of the Taoiseach's response. The response and that call to Downing Street should have been much quicker. I am also concerned he is perhaps indulging in wishful thinking of the sort that might suggest that Boris Johnson and his government are not capable of really walking away from the commitments they have made.I will say again that in the Taoiseach's conversation with him, he needs to dispense with diplomatic niceties and to set out the position very clearly to him. The Taoiseach might also remind him that the North voted to remain.Now, not alone are they proposing to walk away from binding international commitments but yet again they are turning their faces away from the democratic decision of people on our island. These stakes are very high for all of us and we cannot afford to have hesitancy or any lack of forcefulness and rigour in dealing with Boris Johnson and his administration.That does not make any sense.No, no-----I recall the Taoiseach steered the ship-----That is what has happened.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-08	---	1	This morning, the striking Debenhams workers occupied stores in Dublin and Cork. They did so after more than 150 days of campaigning for fair treatment from the company that has treated them in an appalling manner. The company, as the Taoiseach knows, simply shut up shop and left workers high and dry. Initially, they were left with only basic State supports and the prospect of statutory redundancy. I am sure the Taoiseach understands the anger and frustration of these workers at this time. The liquidator, KPMG, has now withdrawn the offer it proposed to the workers. This is a very provocative action, especially when we consider the duration of this dispute and everything the workers have been through.I have raised the issue of the Debenhams workers with the Taoiseach previously. On that occasion I asked him to act immediately to intervene in support of the workers and to legislate so that this disgraceful scenario can never happen again to another worker. At that time, the Taoiseach said he would do everything he could to help the workers. Given what has unfolded today, including the arrest of some Debenhams workers here in Dublin, I want the Taoiseach to set out what he has actually done. Figures released by the European Commission today show Ireland is second only to Spain in terms of jobs lost in the second quarter of this year. A lot of people have lost their jobs and a lot more will lose theirs. This is what makes this Debenhams dispute so important for every vulnerable worker. This is, in fact, a test case for the Government. The Taoiseach gave a commitment that the Government would review company law, which leaves workers in such awful situations, with a view to amending it. Where is this review at? That the Government acts now and stands up for workers and legislates in their interests is not only important for the Debenhams workers, it is also important for every worker throughout the country. The Covid emergency has brought great economic turmoil and many people now look with a level of nervousness and uncertainty, particularly as the Government plans to curtail and cut the pandemic unemployment payment and the employment wage subsidy scheme.The Taoiseach may say this is very complicated and complex but he knows he has options available to him to protect workers and prevent rogue companies from treating their staff in such a disgraceful way. We in Sinn Féin have published legislation to stop unscrupulous employers using tactical insolvency to avoid their obligations to their workers. The Taoiseach could support that legislation. The Irish Congress of Trade Unions has outlined a statutory scheme for the protection of redundancy payments. The Duffy Cahill report presents a range of measures the Government could support and adopt in legislation. The Taoiseach therefore has options but he now has to demonstrate the political will to stand on the side of workers. He needs to start with the Debenhams workers today. He needs to intervene directly on their behalf. He should lift the phone to them at this time when they feel very vulnerable and left behind. He also needs to raise the phone to KPMG and request that it re-enter engagement and negotiation with the workers. It is not good enough for the Government to stand idly by while workers who have given years, in some cases decades, of loyal service give such service only to be abandoned.It is not right that these workers have had to stand on picket lines for months on end. The Taoiseach needs to act now. Will he lift the phone to KPMG?Debenhams was not the first offender in using such tactical insolvencies and the loopholes the Taoiseach has described. Everyone will recall Clerys and its workers and will remember that at that time, the political class said it must never happen again. Guess what? It has happened again and will happen again, time after time, in both the retail sector and elsewhere, unless those loopholes are closed. The time for reviewing is over and the time for action is now. When will the law be changed to protect workers in these situations?The Taoiseach says the workers and all parties should get back around the table. What table? To what table do the liquidator, the company, the workers and their union return? Can the Taoiseach set that out? Engagement is essential. The industrial relations machinery of the State has run its course. That is over and we are dealing with a deeply unjust situation in which workers who have given decades of their lives and of service have been thrown on the scrapheap by Debenhams. The Taoiseach has to intervene with the liquidator and others and tell them to return to the table. What table will that be?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-09-02	---	1	That is excellent and is, I am sure, met with joy universally. I thank the Ceann Comhairle for his opening statement.There are many things I might have raised with the Taoiseach today as we return to session. I did not think I would be raising the issue of energy costs, but here we are. This morning, people woke to the news that some 1 million of them are to face higher electricity costs from the beginning of October. This is a result of the 3.4% price hike announced by Electric Ireland. It is important that we all understand the level of anger and stress this news will bring.There is no doubt that the past six months have been incredibly difficult for people. Many have lost their jobs and many others have seen their household income collapse. It is fair to say that families throughout the land are struggling to make ends meet, with hundreds of thousands of people reliant on State income support and many others working reduced hours. Indeed, many people wonder whether they will ever go back to normal working life again. Those working from home have already seen their energy costs increase as a result. Ordinary people have also faced price hikes by insurance companies and banks. The last thing people can afford now is higher electricity bills as we move into winter.This move by Electric Ireland will add further financial pressure on families. Sinn Féin believes that a freeze on energy prices during the current Covid-19 pandemic should be introduced. There are big fears among the public that this particular hike will kick-start a deluge of price increases. In blunt terms, that would lead to many families finding it incredibly difficult to heat their homes or to turn on a light during a winter that falls in the middle of a global pandemic. EUROSTAT tells us that consumers in Ireland already pay some of the highest electricity prices in Europe. We know that hundreds of thousands of people live in what is called fuel poverty, which means they struggle or are unable to heat their homes. It should be said also that the Government is planning to introduce a significant hike in the carbon tax in the upcoming budget and that this will put increased pressure on those same families.One cannot blame people, therefore, for thinking that, even in the grip of a public health emergency, rip-off Ireland is alive and well and that big companies will make sure they get their pound of flesh. People hear the words of solidarity and the slogan that we are all in this together and they see the comforting television adverts from companies telling them not to worry or stress and that their service provider has their back, but then their bills go up again.I say to the Taoiseach very clearly and explicitly that this hike in energy prices is an ask too far. It goes directly against the fairness and understanding that we urge among the public whom we serve. Rather than hiking prices, energy providers should be working with their customers. They should recognise the circumstances in which we find ourselves and they should be moving towards the freeze in prices and costs to which I referred. I ask the Taoiseach to intervene on this matter. I ask him to direct the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment, Deputy Eamon Ryan, to intervene with the regulator, the utility companies, the network provider and anyone else with whom he and the Government must intervene because this needs to be sorted out.The past six months were very difficult for people and the next six months will equally be difficult as we face into maybe the most difficult winter season in living memory. Big asks are being made of businesses, as the Taoiseach says, of workers and of families. In that context, any hike in energy costs or any utility cost is quite simply out of the question. We have had a hard time, but it has been particularly hard for low-paid workers, low-income families, seasonal workers and younger workers. It is in that spirit that I want the Taoiseach not simply to intervene with Electric Ireland, the Regulator and the networks. I want the Taoiseach to put a stop to this proposed hike and to any proposal to increase energy costs in the coming period.I also ask the Taoiseach to put a stop to the hike in the public service obligation, PSO, levy levied by the Government which is set to increase by more than 100% in the near future. The Taoiseach needs to stop that also because the rhetoric of support for families and workers who are trying to make ends meet in the most difficult of circumstances has to be matched by action. Not alone must we see an end to this proposed increase by Electric Ireland, it needs to be made clear to all other suppliers that hikes in energy costs are not acceptable and will not be allowed happen. Equally, the Government should cancel this proposed hike in the PSO levy and in a concrete way, demonstrate in that support for workers and families - the people who have kept society together and on whom we are relying for social solidarity to get us through the hard times - that the Taoiseach and the entire Government will, in fact, not simply talk but act.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-29	---	1	Welfare and solidarity payments should not be abused. We are all in agreement on that point. If there is any malpractice or fraud, it must be addressed. The circumstances we now face do not relate to corruption or malpractice but to a decision taken by the Government to openly and blatantly discriminate against workers who are on a Covid payment. Having issued inconsistent and confused travel advice, the Government now says that workers on a Covid payment cannot take a holiday that they may have paid for 12 months ago and that may be to one of the Government's green-list countries, without fear of losing their income. The Government's confused travel advice also means those people are not guaranteed a refund if they cancel that holiday. Its approach is discriminatory. The billionaire classes and tax exiles have been accommodated and there is not a chance of a penalty for them; they have been facilitated. The Government's utter hypocrisy and unfairness is galling. It is my strong view that nobody should take international trips. I also believe the travel advice should clearly and unambiguously set that out, but that is not the case. If the Government is determined to penalise people for travelling abroad, it must have universal penalties, not ones targeted at one section of the population, because the unfairness of that speaks for itself. The Government's lack of understanding and empathy for people who have been through the mill and lost their jobs is remarkable. The Taoiseach said that we are all in this together, but it is clear now that we are not.Tomorrow, the Government will bring forward further legislation, this time on vulture funds. A vulture fund lost a court case in April and now the Government is introducing legislation to address the concerns and needs of such funds. It is hugely worrying that this measure is being sneaked through in Covid emergency legislation without any pre-legislative scrutiny, but that is this Government all over. It certainly makes it clear in whose interests it acts.I asked the Taoiseach yesterday to state the legal basis for Government actions such as inspections at our airports and the sourcing of information from people travelling abroad. It seems to me that the Government acted outside the law. Yesterday, the Taoiseach said he favours a review of cases where people have had their money stopped. Who will carry out that review? When will it take place and will people get their money back?It is the Taoiseach who has broken the consensus and the notion that we are all in this together by sending inspectors to airports seeking out those on Covid payments. That is what has happened. I put it to the Taoiseach that in so doing, the Government acted outside the law. I would like him to state to the Dáil the legal basis upon which individuals were approached to establish their social welfare status. Did the Department have reasonable grounds to do so, or did inspectors simply make an assessment based on the look of someone? Was everybody asked and checked? The Taoiseach concedes that travel is at a record low and that there is no widespread clamour among those on Covid payments to travel overseas; far from it. Why then has the Government targeted them in this way? I too wish that nobody would take a trip abroad. That is my position and I think it is the correct position. However, the Government's advice is confusing to the extent that those who may have paid for their holidays 12 months ago are not in a position to get a refund. Now they face the prospect of losing their Covid payment if they travel, which is their sole source of income.I put it to the Taoiseach again that if there are penalties for travelling abroad, they should be universal. If the Government chooses, as it has chosen, to target those on Covid-19 payments, that is discriminatory and unfair and should not happen. I want the Taoiseach to state what form this review will take. Is it a special review?Will it be carried out by the Department, when will we see results from it and when will the small number of people involved get their money back?I am.No, the Taoiseach has not.No, it is not.Somebody did.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-29	---	2	I wish to voice my disappointment and dissatisfaction at the fact that the Taoiseach has consistently failed to answer the very simple questions put by me and Deputy Paul Murphy.The Taoiseach may think that is clever but it is not clever at all. It is disingenuous and unhelpful to the people we represent.The Enough is Enough - Every Voice Counts campaign has been raised this afternoon and I wish to return to it. The stories have been set out of those whose day-care facilities have been closed and the kind of devastation that has meant in their lives for them, their carers and their families. I spoke to families who reported regression, depression, isolation and loneliness and a real desire, in an urgent and immediate way, to have their services reopened.I welcome that the €20 million cut to disability services will not now go ahead but I want the Taoiseach to clarify the position because I was unclear on this point. Is he saying that cut will not go ahead, full stop, or did I hear him hint at the need for business cases to be submitted by service providers to ensure the cut will not be made? I would like clarity on that point and I imagine service providers would like clarity on it too.I would like the Taoiseach to answer questions. We all like things but it seems we are not going to get them.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-28	---	1	Last week, we had the debacle around the Government's green list. Its travel advice was, and is, confused and ambiguous and relies on citizens using their best judgment. Personally, I would prefer that nobody travel abroad this year but the fact remains that we have been given advice only, not a firm instruction, much less a legal requirement. Despite this, the Government has taken it upon itself to send officials to our airports seeking out people on the Covid payment who have decided, in their best judgment, to travel. One section of our population is being singled out without notice or warning. On the basis of confused advice, the Government wants to punish and make an example of people who lost their jobs because it closed down the economy to deal with the pandemic.Many of these are the same people who were excluded from the Government's stay and spend initiative, so they will not be helped to holiday at home. Many had booked and paid for their holidays months ago but, because of the Government's ambiguous travel advice, they may not qualify for a refund and may lose substantial sums of money. In a final insult to these people, they will be penalised if they do travel, even to one of the green list countries. Every which way they turn, they lose.Will the Taoiseach acknowledge that his Government's travel advice does not have the force of law? Will he accept that the travel advice is confused as to the difference between green and non-green countries and on whether one needs to restrict one's movement on return? Will he accept that the Government has uniquely chosen those who have lost their jobs for punishment should they choose to travel abroad? I want the Taoiseach to accept this is wrong and, more importantly, to reverse this decision.I understand this decision was incorporated in social welfare guidance early on Monday morning, just 24 hours after the Tánaiste set out his position on RTÉ. The Tánaiste also claimed that the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection gets information from the airports. At this morning's meeting of the Special Committee on Covid-19 Response, however, the Dublin Airport Authority categorically denied it collects such information. Its representatives said they had no details as to who collects such data in its facilities. Will the Taoiseach clarify who is collecting this information? On what legal basis is it collected? Will this now stop? This is yet another episode in an unfolding farce.I am sure the Taoiseach is not suggesting that those 287,000 recipients of the Covid payment are scamming the system or that they qualify as scammers. I would like him to make that very clear. These are people who have lost work and hope to return to work as soon as they possibly can. They are out of work because we are in the throes of a public health emergency. It is the case that the Government is singling out a section of the population for special and negative attention, because the fact is that there is no penalty, financial or otherwise, for citizens who are not on the Covid payment should they choose to travel to one of the green list countries, yet the Government is saying to all of those citizens who are out of work, through no fault of their own, that they will face a very significant sanction, that being the removal of their single and only source of income. That is a very harsh measure to take.It does feel like the Government is picking on a very particular section of the population. The Taoiseach avoided each and every one of my questions, so let me put a very straightforward question to him.An individual in receipt of the Covid payment will be penalised by loss of that payment should he or she travel abroad. Will the Taoiseach tell us when that decision was taken and who decided to change the social welfare guidance? Was it the Tánaiste or the Taoiseach and was it discussed at Cabinet? More to the point, will he tell us if he sees fit to end this ludicrous, farcical and deeply unfair situation?They were the Taoiseach's words.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-22	---	1	I wish to raise with the Taoiseach his Government’s handling of the issue of international travel. There is absolute public confusion and a lack of public confidence in the Government’s whole approach which has been marked as cack-handed and, frankly, operating on a wing and a prayer. Yesterday the Taoiseach was at odds with the Tánaiste, and the confusion between the two hardly adds to public confidence. Instead of managing the risks that we clearly face, he has now pursued a reckless policy with virtually no checks and balances.In the small hours of last night the Government published its green list in which it itemised 15 countries and territories for which it has reduced the security profile. It has put itself at odds with the public health advice, which is that there be no international travel, and has at once said to the public that they can travel with reduced risks but has asked that they do not do so. Ordinary people have been thrown under the bus. They face the situation that those who listen to the public health advice and forgo their holidays are potentially out of pocket by thousands of euro. Those who do not heed the public health advice and travel will do so uninsured.The other problem is that the Taoiseach and Government have not produced a red list of those countries and zones where there is a very high prevalence of this virus. There is a deep concern that people are travelling to this island from those places, and when they arrive here, they are asked simply to fill out a form and restrict their movements. There is no isolation and no proper form of quarantine. Putting a form online is not going to address any of this.I also remind the Taoiseach that the bottom line outside of holiday season is to get our children back to school, to get people back to education and back to work safely and keep them at work safely. We need to get back to basics and the Government needs to have a proper plan and strategy.I have two questions. First, what will the Taoiseach do to support those families who listen to the public health advice and do not travel internationally and find themselves out of pocket, in some cases by thousands of euro? Second, what is he doing to protect public health on the island from travel into the country from those places with a very high prevalence of the virus? What proper operable and effective quarantine and safety measures will he put in place?I hope that the Tánaiste desists from the type of sniping that the Taoiseach has described. We need an all-island approach, and I hope that the North-South Ministerial Council meeting next week will provide an opportunity for Dublin to step forward, stop being passive, and to champion that very approach. Our position is well known within the five party Executive, which is that we need every protection for the island as a single unit. That means effective quarantining methods and not placing a form online and championing this as some great transformation and intervention. It is not. It is about testing, tracing, isolating and having effective and robust procedures for those 134,000 people who have arrived on our island. Currently, that is not the case and well the Taoiseach knows it.In respect of families here and their holiday plans, the Irish Travel Agents Association estimate that €800,000 a day is being lost by consumers. These are the immediate people caught in the crossfire of this. The Government has done precious little to intervene on behalf of those families who do heed the public health advice and choose to holiday at home. I ask again how and when will the Government intervene for these families?Will the Government have an intervention for those families?It is about the right people quarantining.The Taoiseach should be accurate.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-22	---	2	I ask the Taoiseach about the HIQA report into nursing homes which contained some very damning observations. It is absolutely apparent that nursing homes did not conform to any satisfactory level of clinical governance and were left without the human and practical resources necessary to protect residents and staff. We know how all of this ended. It ended with many people losing their lives with many families to this day shattered by that traumatising experience.We need to know what happened in the nursing homes because we need to put right the wrongs of the past number of months. We also need to prepare ourselves for the real possibility of a second surge, as well as to prepare ourselves for the autumn and winter. We need to be absolutely sure that those living in nursing homes are properly cared for and that their families and the wider community have that confidence.I propose we establish a special Oireachtas committee to speedily, efficiently and compassionately examine what happened in our nursing homes. I propose the Taoiseach would support the establishment of this committee.We must do the work now and throughout August to ensure this committee can speedily work in order we learn the lessons and the families affected have some platform for their real experiences to be recorded and responded to.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-21	---	1	"The woman we have just respected, Ruth Morrissey, passed away on Sunday. As the Taoiseach is aware, Ruth was one of hundreds of women impacted upon by failures in the CervicalCheck screening system. She has paid the ultimate price for those failures and is now grieved by her family, including her heartbroken husband, Paul, her devastated little girl, Libby, and her wider family and circle of friends. There are no words I can offer that can adequately convey the magnitude of the loss felt by her death, but suffice to say, the State grievously failed Ruth Morrissey. Tá mo chroí briste ar son clann Ruth. Is tragóid é cás Ruth, agus nílim in ann glacadh leis go raibh uirthi dul chuig na cúirteanna.Instead of holding up its hands and admitting liability, the State joined the US laboratories that were at fault in this case in dragging a terminally-ill woman through the courts and fought her tooth and nail every step of the way.Even when Ruth won her case at the High Court, she was hauled before the Supreme Court to suffer one final indignity before she was vindicated. Ruth's solicitor, Mr. Cian O'Carroll, has described this as ""deathbed litigation"".All this happened despite the then Taoiseach, Deputy Varadkar, giving a promise to the women concerned that this would never happen. The truth is that this adversarial and aggressive approach has been maintained. I understand there are approximately 203 active claims relating to the CervicalCheck matter, of which eight have been concluded. I would like the Taoiseach to confirm those facts.This is entirely wrong. The Government should not be joining with negligent laboratories in fighting these women. A decent Government would stand up for them, protect them and ensure justice is done. A decent Government would be acting to ensure none of this happens again. We need to fix the system, and that is the only lasting tribute that can be made to Ruth and the other women involved. As the late Ms Emma Mhic Mhathúna once said, talk is cheap and action must follow.Will the Taoiseach now intervene and ensure the State accepts and acknowledges its responsibility and liability and stops dragging very sick women through the courts? Will the Taoiseach accept the outsourcing of screening has been a disastrous failure? He has committed to the establishment of a national laboratory for cervical cancer testing and this must happen as a matter of urgency, as 90% of Irish screening is still done in US laboratories. Astonishingly, despite everything that has happened, this is still unsupervised by an Irish inspector. Will the Taoiseach commit to fast-tracking the establishment of the national laboratories for cervical cancer testing as a matter of absolute urgency? In the meantime, will the Taoiseach instruct the HSE that Irish inspection of US laboratories must happen urgently?The apology, when it was made, was for the non-disclosure element of this scandal. The family of Ruth Morrissey have made it very clear that they are not interested in apologies. That ship has very sadly sailed for Ruth Morrissey. What we need is action. The tribunal to which the Taoiseach referred is an adversarial mechanism. If I can quote Ms Justice Mary Irvine on the matter. She stated that the claims before the tribunal are to be heard in the same manner as the High Court hears and determines personal injuries actions for negligence and the High Court determines such claims in what is described as an adversarial process. That is the fact. In addition, the tribunal mechanism has no means of fast-tracking cases, bearing in mind that we are dealing with very sick women. The truth is that this State has not made available to these women a mechanism that is non-adversarial or a mediated mechanism for the State to acknowledge and to carry its full liability for the damage to these women's health and, in many cases, for the loss of their lives and the loss of them as women and mothers to their families.At the heart of this scandal is another scandal, and it is that of the outsourcing of screening services. I wish to recall that when that decision was made the House was warned of the many dangers of proceeding in that direction and, tragically, those warnings have come home to roost. It is essential that the national laboratory to which the Taoiseach has committed is established and resourced as a matter of urgency.It is also absolutely essential that while screening continues in the United States that it is invigilated. I cannot believe, after everything that has happened and on the day that we mark the passing of Ruth Morrissey, that the Taoiseach cannot accept the absolute necessity for Irish inspection of what is 90% of screening.I ask the Taoiseach to address the questions. How will he provide a non-adversarial mechanism for these women; what is the timeline for the national screening laboratory; and will he insist that there is supervision and Irish inspection of screening, which continues in the United States?Will the inspectors be Irish?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-15	---	1	"I raise the issue of the sacking of the former Minister, Deputy Cowen. Many were left scratching their heads as to what changed between 2 p.m. and 9 p.m. yesterday. The Taoiseach moved very swiftly from fully backing his man to sacking him. People wonder whether the Taoiseach learned something new and whether there is another twist in the tale or another piece of information. The truth, however, is that the Taoiseach knew this whole sorry story from the very beginning, unlike the rest of us who learned of it piecemeal. Did the Taoiseach share the full story with the Tánaiste and with the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, on 4 July, when he learned the full story, or did he feed it to them piecemeal?He had the full story and he failed to act. That is the truth and that is the problem. He accepted an apology from the then Minister, Deputy Cowen, which we all, including myself, believe was absolutely genuine. The Taoiseach, however, also chose to stand by someone who was challenging a Garda record and account and who had sought to avoid a Garda checkpoint according to that account. He allowed him to give an incomplete statement to the Dáil and he failed to act for a week before it all unravelled yesterday on the floor of the Dáil. This raises very serious questions about the Taoiseach as Head of Government because it was only when his lack of judgment was exposed that he chose to act. In a very short period, he went from backing the then Minister, Deputy Cowen, to sacking him. Tá ceisteanna don Taoiseach mar cheannaire an Rialtais. Laistigh de tamall gearr chuaigh sé ó chosaint Teachta Cowen go dtí é a chur as a phost.I have a series of questions for the Taoiseach. He said in the Dáil yesterday that he had seen the document, the PULSE record, that morning and that ""having seen it, I can say that it is not quite as it has been portrayed."" The Taoiseach therefore actively moved to play down the content of the Garda PULSE record. However, by 9 p.m. last night, he said that the issues in that same record were so serious and raised such fundamental questions that they had to be addressed and that he had moved to sack Deputy Cowen because he would not deal with these issues before the Dáil. This raises two questions. Did the Taoiseach mislead the Dáil by playing down the content of that PULSE record? If that is not the case, what did he learn after 2 p.m. yesterday? When he sacked the then Minister, Deputy Cowen, he said that he had asked or instructed him to answer the legitimate and serious questions arising from the Garda PULSE record in the Dáil, yet only hours earlier he had voted against bringing Deputy Cowen before the Dáil to do just that.The Taoiseach confirmed yesterday that he had been made aware of the allegation that Deputy Cowen avoided a Garda checkpoint and that he spoke to him the weekend before last on this matter. That was prior to Deputy Cowen making what was to be a full statement to the Dáil. The Taoiseach let that go. He allowed an incomplete statement to stand on the record of the Dáil. The Taoiseach seems to have sacked Deputy Cowen for his failure or refusal to answer questions. I hope he will now, as Head of Government, answer questions on the issues he needs to clarify.I have the record of what the Taoiseach said yesterday. He made clear that he was fully aware of all aspects of the story regarding Deputy Cowen from the beginning. That is not an assertion of mine; it has been clarified by the Taoiseach. He said:I spoke to the Minister, Deputy Cowen, the weekend before last and he adamantly denied any suggestion or implication that he would have evaded or attempted to avoid a checkpoint.The Taoiseach had that information. Did he share it with the Tánaiste or the leader of the Green Party? I ask the Taoiseach to please answer that question. He had that information and therefore knew full well that Deputy Cowen's statement to the Dáil was incomplete. He did not, however, challenge Deputy Cowen on it. Above all else, the Taoiseach stood behind, and today has continued to stand behind, an assertion by a former senior Minister and senior member of the Taoiseach's party which contradicts a Garda record. I am sure the Taoiseach will appreciate that is a very serious matter. I believe it is unprecedented for the Head of Government to side with a party colleague in contradicting a Garda record, using the cover of legal processes to so do. The Taoiseach's judgment in all of this is very much in question. He had the information. Did he share it with his partners in government? He allowed his colleague to make an incomplete statement.It was the Taoiseach and his colleagues in government who prevented Deputy Cowen from coming yesterday, today or any other day to give an account of himself and to answer what the Taoiseach concedes are very legitimate questions.No, I am not.Which the Taoiseach prevented."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-15	---	2	The ban on evictions, notices to quit and rent increases expires on Monday next. As the Taoiseach will be aware, tens of thousands of renters who have lost income due to Covid-19 are protected by this ban and without it, they will be immediately at risk of eviction or perhaps homelessness. There were worrying reports in last weekend's papers that the Taoiseach is being advised not to extend the ban. I remind him that during the general election when we in Sinn Féin spoke about a rent freeze and applying protections for those renters, we were told it could not be done. In fact, many went so far as to say that to do so would be unconstitutional, yet those protections were then introduced, albeit in the context of a public health emergency. Will the Taoiseach clarify the Government's position? I ask him to commit to extending these protections, not just to October but to year's end, and to also commit to introducing a rent arrears debt resolution scheme, including the option of partial or full rent write-downs.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-14	---	1	"I have been reluctant to raise the matter of the Minister, Deputy Cowen, on Leaders' Questions before today. I absolutely accept that everybody makes mistakes, that people learn from those mistakes and that they move on. We wanted to give the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine every opportunity to address all of the matters concerned, to draw a line under them and to move on at a time of huge health and economic challenges, not least for the farming community. Last week, the Minister had the opportunity to do just that by putting all of the facts on the record of the Dáil in relation to his drink-driving incident but, unfortunately, he has failed to do that.We now have an unprecedented situation where a Minister is disputing the Garda PULSE record of a drink-driving offence he was involved in and looking to have that record changed. Last week in his personal statement, the Minister stated he was ""conscious that a constant drip feed of new information can be damaging and destabilising"". He said it was for that reason he had conducted a full examination of all records that he could obtain. Yet here we are a week later and the drip feed of new information continues.On 4 July, according to , contact was made with the Minister regarding the Garda record from 18 September 2016, stating that he sought to evade a Garda checkpoint on the evening of the drink-driving offence.  today quotes sources saying the Taoiseach was made aware of these records at the time of this media query, that is, the weekend before last. Can the Taoiseach confirm when he was made aware of the Garda record of the Minister's attempt to evade a Garda checkpoint? Was he aware of this before the Minister made his statement to the Dáil? Did the Minister discuss with the Taoiseach or seek advice from the Taoiseach regarding his decision to seek to amend the record relating to his 2016 drink-driving conviction? Does the Taoiseach accept that the Minister's statement to the Dáil was incomplete, as it made no mention of this Garda record? When did the Taoiseach inform his coalition partners about all of this? Has he challenged the Minister on his incomplete statement? Does he accept that a Minister challenging the accuracy or, indeed, the truthfulness of a Garda PULSE record is a very serious matter?It is becoming clear that the Minister, Deputy Cowen, will have to come before the House and take questions on all of these issues. However, for the purposes of today's discussion, I am more concerned with what the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, knew. He has confirmed that he did, in fact, know about the Garda PULSE record and that there was an allegation that the Minister had sought to evade a Garda checkpoint. He has confirmed that he knew that information as or before the Minister was making his statement. I find it extraordinary that the Taoiseach would stand over a Minister who has made an incomplete statement to the Dáil on a matter of this importance. Were the Taoiseach's coalition partners, the leaders of Fine Gael and the Green Party, aware of the PULSE record and the allegation that the Minister had evaded a Garda checkpoint at the time the Minister, Deputy Cowen, made his statement? The Taoiseach said he has had a conversation with the Minister, but the Taoiseach did not indicate that he challenged the Minister on the fact that his statement was incomplete.I accept the Minister's point on data protection. That matter should be investigated by the appropriate authorities but it is not the net point here. The net point is that a Minister is now contradicting a Garda record. He came before the House to make what was to be a complete, no-holds-barred statement on all the material matters and did not state that this Garda PULSE record existed and that an allegation had been made that he had sought to evade a Garda checkpoint. That is absolutely extraordinary. It is even more extraordinary that the Taoiseach, as the Head of Government, would accept that. Do the Taoiseach's coalition partners similarly accept that the Minister was right to come before the House and not give us all the information? Do they also accept that he is right to challenge the Garda PULSE record? It is extraordinary that a Minister is now openly contradicting the PULSE records. This is not just about Deputy Cowen, because we all must rely on the truthfulness and accuracy of PULSE records. The Minister has brought that accuracy into question but he has also failed to give a full account of events on that night. The Taoiseach was aware that there was another twist in the tale and yet it seems he has not challenged the Minister on it. Does he believe in full and frank statements to this House, or does he not?Then publish it.Then the Taoiseach should have the Minister publish it."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-08	---	1	"Today, I want to raise the issue of the Debenhams workers. I was alarmed and disappointed with the Taoiseach's response yesterday when these matters were raised. His response was lacklustre and it was not the type of response that I believe is required from Government.As the Taoiseach will know, the Debenhams workers have been in dispute with their employer for some months now. At the height of the Covid emergency, they were on the picket line and they are on the picket line still, 24-7, standing up for their right to be treated with respect but also fighting a battle that has a much wider significance than just Debenhams. Debenhams has used a tactical liquidation of its Irish stores to walk away from all of its responsibilities to its workers. It is now the intention of Debenhams to take possession of all assets and stock in its Irish stores to funnel the profits through its British operations, at the same time leaving its workers here high and dry.The Debenhams workers are not the first to be treated in this appalling manner by their employer and because of Government inaction, they will not be the last. The use of tactical liquidation is not new to this State. The Taoiseach will recall that in 2015 staff who had given a lifetime of service to Clerys were unceremoniously dumped by their employers and left high and dry. They did not receive their statutory redundancy lump sum, they never got moneys owned in lieu of notice of redundancy or holiday pay and the State was left to foot the bill. This is the blueprint for what is happening in Debenhams. There needs to be immediate intervention by the State and Government. The Taoiseach will recall that in the case of Clerys we all said at that time that this could never happen again, but it has. Now is the time for immediate and effective action.What the workers are looking for is not unreasonable, it is necessary. They want the Government to intervene and engage with KPMG, the liquidators appointed by the UK parent company. They want the Government to directly intervene with the parent company and they want Debenhams to honour previous agreements to pay two weeks' redundancy per year of service in addition to the statutory redundancy. They want to be treated with respect. They do not want a situation where Debenhams can simply walk away. It is now urgent that the Government act. It is also urgent that we legislate. I want the Taoiseach to move beyond the words he uttered yesterday, which were equivocal and non-committal. I want to hear a firm commitment from him today that the Government will act immediately to directly support these workers and will also act immediately to legislate.Here is the problem. The State and the Government have not intervened in the appropriate way to protect these workers. I remind the Taoiseach that since 2015 he has been saying that there needs to be a review and a change to the legislation. In regard to the Clerys situation he said, ""The most effective intervention is legislative"". At that time, he challenged for a review of the law to ensure that this type of behaviour cannot continue. Five years on, the Taoiseach is still talking about reviewing legislation. That is not good enough. Deputy Micheál Martin may be new to the office of Taoiseach but he is not new to Government. Fianna Fáil supported the previous Administration for four long and very difficult years, during which it did precisely zilch, nothing, to ensure that this type of scandalous situation would not happen again.This afternoon, we will publish legislation in line with the Duffy Cahill report to prevent these kinds of tactical liquidations and insolvencies.I ask that the Government support this legislation and, furthermore, that we make time before we rise for the summer to ensure we have on our books the right law, which is long overdue to protect the Debenhams workers and all the other vulnerable workers out there at this time of economic crisis, so that this type of scandal cannot happen again. That requires the Taoiseach to act, not to contemplate, push things down the pipe or hide behind complexity but to lead from the front, to act and to legislate.When?I know that the Government will not do anything."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-08	---	2	Access to affordable housing was, arguably, the biggest topic during last February's general election campaign. It is little wonder, given that people had endured years of failed policy that left them paying extortionate rents and there was an inability on the part of practically an entire generation to access affordable housing and precious little council housing. This was an approach by a Government that the Taoiseach's party supported fully for a number of years so it is probably not all that surprising that the commentary on housing in the programme for Government is so lame. It represents more of the same, it is disappointing and it is a recipe for failure.Last evening, the Government voted against a motion brought forward by my colleague, Deputy Ó Broin, that set out real solutions to affordable housing and the bones of a plan for the most ambitious public housing programme in the history of the State.Be in no doubt that this is the scale of ambition required to deliver affordable housing to our people. I have a question for the Taoiseach. On the basis of what the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government stated last night, why is it that people will have to wait until September to see the new Government's plan for affordable housing? Why is it that the Government will lose so many weeks and months on this----------given that the Taoiseach has said he understands the immediacy of the matter and that he has not wasted a minute since coming into office? Why is there such a delay on this? Why face down the fully reasonable and ambitious plan articulated by our housing spokesperson last evening?I will take it when I can.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	question	2020-07-07	---	1	This morning, the National Women's Council of Ireland and a group of parents, mostly mothers, held a demonstration outside Leinster House in support of the call for an extension to maternity leave and pay. During the Covid-19 crisis, many women have called for a 12-week extension because the emergency has fundamentally impacted on and changed the nature of the important time that they have to spend with their new babies.Rugadh leanaí i lár na géarchéime seo agus tá deacrachtaí ag roinnt teaghlaigh mar gheall ar Covid-19 agus mar gheall ar easpa tacaíochta ón Rialtas. Caithfidh an Rialtas saoire mháithreachais a leathnú chun faoiseamh a thabhairt do theaghlaigh atá faoi bhrú.On 11 June, the National Women's Council handed in a petition signed by more than 28,000 people supporting this demand. It gave that petition to the then Taoiseach, now Tánaiste, Deputy Varadkar. At that time, Deputy Varadkar said that he would give full and meaningful consideration to the request for the extension. The programme for Government commits to extending paid parental leave for parents to allow them to spend more time with their baby during the first year and although the language is vague, it raises the expectation that the Government will now act.Extending maternity leave and pay is the right thing to do, particularly in these times of public health emergency, during which women have given birth without their partner present, they have faced the first few months of motherhood without access to the usual important supports, and the disruption caused by the Covid-19 crisis has consumed time that should have been about the mother and her new baby. What usually characterises this important time has been replaced by immense levels of stress, as the Taoiseach knows. Covid-19 has had a real effect on these families and it has been my view for some time that maternity leave in this State is not fit for purpose. The scheme is unfair and outdated, but perhaps how we remedy that is a discussion for another day. For now, I ask the Taoiseach to confirm that his Government will do the right thing and that he will extend maternity leave and maternity pay for the 12 weeks requested.In that case, we are of one mind. We all recognise that those women and couples who have had children in this period have faced very considerable difficulties and stress without all of the normal supports that new parents generally enjoy when they bring home their newborn.This is a very straightforward request. The Taoiseach should not hide behind a veil of complexity. The simple facts are that these women need additional time. They need additional leave and they need to be sure that that additional leave will be paid leave. To me, this is very straightforward, not least because childcare provision is now under such stress. There is no certainty for many parents that they will be able to get adequate and appropriate childcare, particularly for newborn infants.I again ask the Taoiseach to act swiftly. I understand that the Minister for Justice and Equality in the previous Government had some jurisdiction on these issues. Responsibility for equality has now been moved to a different Department. I do not wish this issue to get lost in the labyrinth or the bureaucratic machinations of the new Government. This is not a time for delay. This is a time for timely action. The matter is time sensitive because many women are now on maternity leave. They are looking at the prospect and the pressure of returning to work. As his first act in government, I ask the Taoiseach to act now, make a clear decision on the matter, act fairly and do the right thing by Irish women and these new mothers.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	debate	2020-07-07	---	2	In the 15 minutes allocated to me, I have some remarks to make and some issues I would like to tease out with the Taoiseach. If we could engage in an interactive format and the Taoiseach could respond, that would be very helpful.Today is the first occasion on which Deputy Martin, as Taoiseach, presented himself for Leaders' Questions and also the Revised Estimates. In building for the future, it should be understood that Irish unity is the very best plan for this island and for our people. It should be recalled that we are living in times of change across the island and in relationships between our island and that of Britain. Brexit and the Covid-19 public health emergency have reshaped how people think and talk about reunification. Both of these crises have shown very dramatically the danger and jeopardy of the Border on our island. No longer is Irish unity discussed only in aspirational terms, it is now increasingly regarded as a common-sense approach and essential to the prosperity of all of our people. I say that because growing our green economy requires an all-Ireland approach. Protecting and building public health services and protecting public health requires an all-Ireland approach, as does strengthening our agricultural sector and defending rural Ireland. All of these things must be all-Ireland in nature. This conversation is happening across the island. People from many different perspectives are reconsidering long-held views and they are looking anew at the prospect of a new Ireland, a united Ireland, and asking how this might deliver a better future for us all.Given all of that, it is disappointing that constitutional change on Irish unity is not featured in the programme for Government. This missed opportunity was compounded by the fact that the Taoiseach failed to appoint anyone from the North to the Seanad. That was a grave mistake. I think we would all agree that the former Senator, Ian Marshall, made a very valuable contribution to the Seanad. He was a strong, independent, unionist and anti-Brexit voice and a very welcome addition to our political discourse. It is very important that Northern society be represented within the Oireachtas and that people from a unionist tradition be included, and so the Taoiseach got this one wrong. Ironically, it flies in the face of commitments made by previous Fianna Fáil Governments to ensuring Northern representation in the Oireachtas. The Taoiseach will recall that that was committed to by his predecessor Bertie Ahern - fadó, fadó.In light of all that, I ask the Taoiseach about his shared island unit. He stated it will be up and running and have a programme of work by the end of this month. No provision is made for this unit in the Estimate. Will the Taoiseach explain that? What exactly is the unit going to do? Will he establish an Oireachtas joint committee on Irish unity? Will he convene an all-island representative citizens' assembly, or such an appropriate forum, to discuss and plan for constitutional change? Will he initiate the process for a referendum and get clarity on what the thresholds for triggering such a referendum might be? I ask that the Taoiseach respond to those initial questions and I will then raise two other issues relating to the Estimates.I do not dispute, nor does anybody else, that the three relationships the Taoiseach set out are absolutely key. That is at the core of the Good Friday Agreement. That matter is settled. Neither do I believe that anything I have said is partisan. It is a clear enunciation of my long-held and well-known beliefs. Far from excluding the other tradition, we supported Ian Marshall when he entered the Seanad and I voted for him as a Seanadóir, even though he clearly does not share my political perspective. It is, in fact, the Taoiseach and the Government that have failed to include a critical voice in the Oireachtas. They lost that opportunity and that is a great pity.The Taoiseach did not really answer my questions so I will write to him and perhaps we will correspond on the matter. There needs to be-----The resourcing for the unit----------and the nature of the work programme that will emerge. All these matters need to be clarified. I have not conjured up out of thin air the idea for a referendum on Irish unity.That is an explicit provision of the Good Friday Agreement and that did not happen today or yesterday. It happened in 1998. There are people now at work and voting who have lived their whole lives in a post-Good Friday Agreement Ireland - thank God - and that is a great credit to all concerned. The idea that we are moving with excessive haste, frankly, does not stack up at all.I turn to the issue of the office of the Tánaiste, which will be established within the Taoiseach's office, and of an office for the leader of the Green Party. Am I right in understanding that the Fine Gael and Green Party leaders will have ministerial advisers, press officers and an aide-de-camp in the case of the Tánaiste, Deputy Varadkar? That is strange and the Taoiseach might explain the precedent for it. Moreover, the Tánaiste and the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, will each have an additional team of staff, including a private office, a policy and programme implementation unit and a deputy Government press secretary. Will the Taoiseach explain and clarify for the House what additional resources the office of the Tánaiste and the new office for the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, will have and where they will come from? Are they new resources or are they redeployments and what is it going to cost?No, I adopt a Good Friday Agreement approach.That is fine. I understand that. What about the question on the Tánaiste?It is because there are precedents that I am raising the issue. I am well aware of the precedents. There is also a precedent for the number of Ministers of State appointed. We need to know not only the structure and rationale for any of the appointments or expansions but also the cost, because the taxpayer is picking up the bill.It is also important to state that there is one Taoiseach in office. I am correct in understanding that. I suggest to the Taoiseach that it is not great for our system of government if there is any real or perceived rivalry from the get-go. I am at a loss to know why the Tánaiste needs an aide-de-camp. I am aware that others are at a loss also. The general public - the people we serve - look on and ask legitimate questions about how we are spending their money. I am unclear, having heard the Taoiseach's response, why somebody in ministerial office, for arguments sake, let us take the leader of the Green Party, the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, Deputy Eamon Ryan, who has a big job to do and an extensive portfolio, might need additional resources and staff. An additional office is to be provided for the Minister. The Department of the Taoiseach will have a department of the Tánaiste within it. What will the other office be? Will it be the office of the leader of the Green Party? We just need to know what it looks like and, critically, the cost.My final point, to which the Taoiseach may not get a chance to respond, is on citizens' assemblies. They are very effective mechanisms and involve deliberative processes and absolutely powerful stuff. The Taoiseach has committed to assemblies on biodiversity, matters relating to drug use, the future of education and, later, an elected mayor and local government structures best suited to Dublin. There is, however, no additional money in the Estimates for any of these. Are we to take it as read that the single Citizens' Assembly on gender equality is the only one that will be up and running between now and the end of the year?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	debate	2020-06-27	---	1	I thank my colleagues, na Teachtaí Pearse Doherty and Mairéad Farrell, for nominating me for the office of An Taoiseach. It is, of course, a huge honour to be elected to that highest of offices and it seems today that the honour will fall to Deputy Micheál Martin. I wish him well in that.February was the month of an election of change, when in unprecedented numbers people voted for fairness, progress and a new direction in Irish politics. Sinn Féin won more votes than any other party and, undeniably, this was a mandate for Sinn Féin to enter into government and a mandate for a Government for change. Faced with the prospect of losing their grip on power, Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have circled the wagons. They excluded Sinn Féin and the voices of more than 500,000 people from Government formation talks. Chaith daoine vóta ar son athraithe. Tá athrú ag teastáil agus tá sé thar am.Today's marriage of convenience is borne of necessity and not ambition; it is to buy time and to keep others out and in their place. For the political establishment, it is their way or no way. I have to tell those people they will no longer get it all their own way; that day is over.The inescapable truth is that the future belongs to those of us who believe in change. The measure and mettle of the Irish people is reflected in how they have handled the Covid-19 pandemic. It is evident in the daily acts of kindness, the spirit of community and the commitment to the belief that none of us is safe unless all of us are safe. The Covid-19 crisis has not dampened the desire; if anything it has strengthened it. People have had time to reflect on their lives and what really matters. Many people now realise the price of having Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael together in government is too high.The people were very clear in the election and they told us what the foundation of a good life means to them.They said it was affordable housing, healthcare when they need it, childcare that does not break the bank, a fair economy that delivers for workers where one can retire with dignity at the age of 65 with a State pension, and a greener, cleaner Ireland built on climate justice and social justice too. The people also told us in large numbers that Irish unity matters.This was not a protest vote. It was a vote driven by kindness, goodwill and compassion and one rooted in common sense, yet those very issues, which dominated the election, are the issues that have been dodged in the programme for Government. As Leader of Sinn Féin, let me set out our stall. Ordinary people will not shoulder the burden of this economic crisis. They will not be told to stand at the back of the queue while the banks and the vulture capitalists have their fill. They will not go down the black hole of slash and burn austerity again. We will champion investment, stimulus and policies that grow our economy and strengthen our society. We will stand up for those families who work so hard to make a good life for themselves but see their efforts cancelled out because of a sky-high cost of living and a failure to invest in public services. We will give those who go unheard by Government - people living with disabilities, carers, young people and our senior citizens - a voice. We will work to transform all of Ireland for the better because fairness, equality, decency and real solutions are the issues that matter to families and workers and they are the issues that will shape Sinn Féin's determination to deliver what will be the most effective Opposition ever seen in this State.No longer is a better, fairer, united Ireland the dream of the idealistic few. It is now the achievable goal of the many. It is an ambition shared by people from all walks of life. Change pulses through the veins of our nation, fuelled by positivity, hope, solidarity and the promise of a better tomorrow. Those of us who believe in change are resolute. We are determined and together. It is the parties of the political establishment, hunkered behind their high walls, with their jaded ideas desperately clutching to yesterday, that are out of step. The people of Ireland are entitled to a future that is the measure of their hopes and ambition.To those who believe in change, to all those who voted for change, to those who refuse to let go of change, dóibh siúd a chaith a vóta ar son athraithe, impím oraibh gan thabhairt suas. Ná caill croí. Our time is coming because change cannot be stopped. To every person we met on the election trail who confided in us their hardships and deepest fears, who inspired us with their bright optimism and hope for the future, who entrusted us with the task of standing up for them, we are here because of you and for you. This is not the end. This is just the beginning.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	debate	2020-06-27	---	2	"I extend my good wishes to An Taoiseach, Deputy Micheál Martin. I have no doubt that this is a proud day for him, his people and his community. I also extend good wishes to all those who have now been appointed to ministerial offices because this is a cause for celebration for all of them.In February last, we presented a manifesto for change to the people and we asked them to give us a chance to deliver that change, to lead. The people by way of response gave us a record mandate to enter government. That was not to be on this occasion but, nonetheless, we have witnessed a realignment of Irish politics. Sinn Féin, for the first time, will now lead the Opposition and Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have formally come together. The widespread expectation that a change election would be followed by the formation of a new Government that could deliver the new politics that people are crying out for was not to be. The century-old impulse to grab power, to maintain the old political order, to push back against the instinct and energy for change so powerfully demonstrated at the ballot box, drew Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael together. The truth is they have coalesced and colluded in frustrating the voice of change. A Cheann Comhairle, excluding the representatives of more than half a million citizens is nothing to be proud of in my book. I do not think it is something any democrat should boast about. Indeed, succeeding in stalling or stopping necessary change is really no success at all. It is the mark of narrow, failed politics of the past.That narrow kind of thinking is reflected in the unambitious programme for Government. This will be a Government of more of the same. Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael in government is no historical departure. However, Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael forced into a loveless embrace by the hopeful vote of the people; that now is the historical point of departure for their Government. Some have described this as the end of so-called Civil War politics. The reality is that Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael today have precious little to do with anything that was at issue in that tragic conflict. The words of Liam Mellows, a patriot himself executed by the Free State, in his speech against the Treaty, ring very true today: ""Men will hold power, and men who get into positions and hold power will desire to remain undisturbed and will not want to be removed."" For decades, the issue between Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil was supposedly, mar dhea, about Civil War issues. In reality, the ancient quarrel between Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael has long since descended into a race for power and privilege in this State. Forgotten, abandoned in all of this were those who suffered most from the partition of our country, the people of the Six Counties. Forgotten and abandoned was any plan to achieve full democracy, self-determination and unity for Ireland; and so, the great national project of reunification is not included in the programme for Government. There is not a whisper from this Government, while the conversation about constitutional change happens all across our island. This is especially concerning during the age of Brexit, when the imperative to protect the Good Friday Agreement in all of its parts has never been greater. A united Ireland is the very best idea for the future of our country. It is essential to the prosperity of all our people because growing our economy requires an all-Ireland approach. Protecting our health services requires an all-Ireland approach. Getting ahead of Covid-19, protecting public health and protecting our people's health requires an all-Ireland approach. No Government, not least an incoming Government, in this period should ignore the imperative of unity. It should be planning for change and reunification and for that referendum on Irish unity as per the Good Friday Agreement.A Cheann Comhairle, the society shaped by the old establishment divides us between the haves and the have-nots, the insiders and the outsiders, the entitled and the rest. That is why Government after Government has presided over a housing crisis. It is an indictment of successive Governments that housing is so unaffordable for so many. It is also why our health system is broken, crippled by hospital overcrowding, a never-ending trolley crisis and record-breaking treatment waiting lists. It is also why the principle of fairness is breached daily in every aspect of Irish life. The Ireland of Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael is a place where 65 year olds cannot retire in dignity with their State pension. It is one where working parents cannot afford childcare, where educational disadvantage is all too prevalent, where citizens living with disabilities and their carers are forgotten, and where those with mental health challenges are left to fend for themselves. None of this is accidental. All of this is the consequence of bad politics. It is why Governments come and go but nothing really changes. Irish politics is broken and the way of fixing it is by heeding the people's demand for change. The people know this and they have said in record numbers that the time for change is now, and people are ready for a fresh start. Those who drafted the programme for Government, I feel, must live in a different reality from the rest of us. The crises in housing and healthcare dominated the election and both have deepened during the Covid crisis. On top of that, many families are now facing what has been described as a tsunami of debt, as insurance companies were allowed to continue their rip-off, as banks charged interest to 80,000 families who had to take a mortgage break.People need homes that they can afford. I call on the Taoiseach and the new Government to build the affordable homes and make sure they are actually affordable in the real world. People need to be able to see a doctor when they are sick, so the Government must invest in public hospitals and our public system and end the privatisation agenda. What is proposed in the Government's plan, far from tackling these challenges, will only deepen our problems. The issues that mattered most to ordinary people in the course of the election are dodged or fudged. However, the Government has managed to include tax breaks for those at the top in its programme. Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil from the get-go have copped out on delivering common-sense solutions for workers and families. The brief enlightenment in which we saw a turn to more progressive decisions during the Covid-19 emergency has been extinguished by the programme for Government. For Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael, fairness can only ever be a temporary thing, a reaction rather than a principle of good government.Because of its lack of ambition, this is a Government already on borrowed time. Workers and families know that they deserve so much better. It is that belief that will drive Sinn Féin's determination to deliver effective Opposition. We have the policies, a Cheann Comhairle. We have the team. Deputy Doherty has the plan to shape a fair economy, Deputy O'Reilly, that for a national health service. Deputy Ó Broin has the plan to make housing affordable. We are happy to share those plans with the Government and if it is serious about tackling these issues, it will work with those plans. I am very proud to lead our team of 37 Deputies, a team committed to realising a changed Ireland, a fair Ireland and a united Ireland. We will stand up for all of those who voted for change. We will work hard for them and it is in their name that we will hold the Government to account."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	debate	2020-03-19	---	1	"I will share time with Deputy Louise O'Reilly.Across this island there are citizens, families and communities bracing themselves for what will be a very tough few months. The crisis presents us with the challenge of our lifetime to protect health, defend livelihoods and save lives. Nobody here has all the answers to all the challenges we face but we have been elected and we have a job to do. We must listen to and be guided by sound advice, take decisions and lead. It is what we must do. Social distancing and keeping ourselves to ourselves will slow this virus and social solidarity, community and family will protect us from isolation, anxiety and fear; we must practice both in equal measure.People have responded to the collective effort to stop the spread of Covid-19. They have heard the public health information and people have made the conscious decision to minimise social contact. People and communities have rallied to the call to slow this virus. Over the weekend and on St. Patrick's Day, people cancelled parties, gatherings and family occasions in order to protect and save the lives of loved ones and neighbours. Nevertheless, yesterday tens of thousands of those same people went back to work in factories, on construction sites and places where there is no real prospect of being able to practise social distancing, where there are no hand sanitisers and where there is no adequate protection. These workers now worry that they are bringing the virus into their homes. This is a concern that must be answered.The legislation before us affords the Minister extraordinary and far-reaching powers; these are extraordinary powers for an extraordinary time. People want to know that these powers will be used to protect them so they ask why it is that large gatherings are still allowed. They ask why it is in this race against time that the Government has not yet introduced measures to give full effect to social distancing. Nobody relishes the idea of what is called ""lockdown"" but people want the full assurance that half-measures are not being taken and corners are not being cut but rather that every necessary measure is being deployed to protect health and safety and it is being done now. The Government must give this reassurance to people and provide full explanations of what is happening, when and why. Orderly and decisive action will bring about calm and reassurance.Equally, people must know that the powers vested in a Minister can be used exclusively for the purpose of addressing this crisis. Tens of thousands of people have lost their jobs and many more will lose their jobs in the days and weeks ahead as businesses are forced to close their doors. For these families, the fear of the virus is matched by the fear of bills or rent that cannot be paid or mortgages that may be defaulted. Today's legislation is just the start of the welfare response for these families. Illness benefit and jobseeker payments are just part of what must be a comprehensive response. It should be said that anybody would struggle on €305 per week and this must be acknowledged.The memory of the banking and financial crises is still fresh in people's minds and the disastrous cutbacks and austerity had dire social consequences. We cannot walk that path again. The people of this State bailed out the country's banks a decade ago and the legacy of that crisis prevails. It was the resilience of ordinary workers that got our economy back on its feet so now, in the eye of this new storm, the State must deliver for its people as guardian of the common good. That is our job here.At this time, people's homes are their sanctuaries. Never before has the need for a secure roof over one's head been greater. It is why we have today proposed an amendment to the legislation that would prohibit evictions for the period in which this legislation is in place. That proposal must be upheld for the common good and no threat of eviction should hang over anybody's head at this time of crisis. We must ensure no person is left behind. It is our responsibility to demonstrate leadership and reassure people that we can get through this crisis.I have no doubt we can do that. We need look no further for our inspiration than to the example of our healthcare workers who are returning in their tens of thousands to work in our hospitals and communities to deal with the crisis. They are the ones whose example we should follow.In that spirit, today, the Dáil needs to resolve that during this emergency no renter will be left unable to pay his or her rent, nobody will be forced into default of their mortgage, nobody will have their utilities or telephone services cut off, nobody will be left without enough income to put food on the table, no viable business will be left unsupported and no front-line worker will be left without the basic protections necessary to do his or her job. Everything that we do now socially, economically and politically must have as its sole priority the health and well-being of workers and families because this is a time for us all to pull together.The Dáil will meet again next week to take further decisions. The work of the Dáil cannot cease at a time of national emergency. I believe that together we have to approach this crisis with resolve and with determination. I again acknowledge the work of everybody who has been involved in the public health response. I commend all, and each one of them, for their work thus far. Their work is invaluable. We salute them and their efforts at this time. Special tribute must be paid to our healthcare staff across the Irish health system, but in our hospitals in particular. Truly, these are the people at the front line of this crisis and none is more deserving of our respect, admiration and support.We need to do our bit. We need a single island-wide response. We live on a small island and we must be in lock-step North and South. This is the only way we can keep our people safe because this is a road that we walk together. In years to come, we will talk about life before the coronavirus and life after the virus, but for now the most important time is the present, the here and now at this daunting time. There is no doubt that we shall overcome. The togetherness we see in our communities, the bravery and professionalism of our front-line health workers and the enduring spirit of our people should fill us all with hope. We have overcome hardship in the past. We are no strangers to dark days, but we will endure together."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	debate	2020-02-20	---	1	Déanaim comhghairdeas leis an gCeann Comhairle ar a cheapachán mar chathaoirleach ar an Tríú Dáil is Tríocha. Is onóir mhór duit agus do theaghlach é. Táim cinnte go ndéanfaidh tú do dhícheall do chuid gnó iomlán a dhéanamh go cruinn. Ar mo shon féin agus ar son Sinn Féin déanaim comhghairdeas leat.Many congratulations to the Ceann Comhairle and, of course, commiserations to Deputy Naughten. We all know that the job of Ceann Comhairle is not an easy one. We all at times have given and no doubt will again give cause to keep you on your toes, a Cheann Comhairle. It is a very important role, not least because you are tasked with defending the rights of Members of this Dáil. It is your job that the mandate of every Deputy is respected and, by extension, that the people who sent us here are represented well. I think you have done a very good job in the role of Ceann Comhairle over the past four years. You undoubtedly have the skill set and the ability to continue the much-needed process of Dáil reform, which you steered over the course of your tenure, to make this Dáil more responsive to the everyday needs and concerns of citizens.The people have voted for change. They have expressed their democratic demand for a politics that is firmly focused on addressing the challenges that they face in their everyday lives. They want change and they want solutions. That desire, that instruction from the people, must be reflected here in the Dáil Chamber in how we engage, how we communicate, how we do our business and, I would argue strongly, in how we form the next Government to be a Government for change. However, I am also mindful of the need for this Dáil to be a Dáil for change, a House that genuinely strives to deliver for all our people. The people have called for a new departure in Irish politics, a future not dominated by a restrictive two-party system but one in which their interests are the priority of everybody elected to the Dáil. It is all of our responsibilities and not just yours alone, a Cheann Comhairle, to ensure that the people are delivered the change they have voted for. For our part in Sinn Féin, I want to assure you of our support in all of your work. I look forward to working with you. I look forward to putting you on your toes and perhaps you keeping me on mine. We wish you well from all of us. From this enlarged Sinn Féin team, we say go n-éirí an t-ádh leat agus le do chlann. Go raibh míle maith agat, a Cheann Comhairle, for all your service.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	51	Dublin Central	debate	2020-02-20	---	2	"I too commend every Teachta Dála elected here, particularly the new Deputies and their families. I thank Deputies Doherty and Kerrane for proposing and seconding me for the position of Taoiseach. In line with the theme of change it is only appropriate to note that today for the first time a nominee from a party other than Fianna Fáil or Fine Gael has managed to garner the greatest number of votes.Perhaps that makes us winners again.I see that we still live rent free in Deputy Micheál Martin's very narrow and bitter mind. I see that he proposes to continue the diatribe and vitriol that sustained him and served him very badly in the course of the election campaign.We are all agreed that the motif and theme emerging from this election is change, but I hear a note from some Members who might seek to suggest that this is some kind of capricious nonsense on the part of the electorate, that perhaps people were not really sure what they meant by change, that it was some kind of fuzzy ill-defined feeling. Nothing could be further from the truth.I was delighted to go the length and breadth of this State and to talk to hundreds, maybe thousands, of people and they told me what change means. Change means a secure roof over their heads, it means not having their adult children and perhaps their children living in the box room. Change means being able to pay your rent and not worrying from week to week or month to month that the landlord might knock on the door and tell you that it is game over. Change means not having your elderly relative on a trolley, not having that surgery or procedure cancelled again and not getting a letter from the authorities in the hospital saying the good news is that you have an appointment but the bad news is that it is 18 months away. Change means knowing that you have enough to get by reasonably well. Change means that you are not constantly bothered by the €2,000 in rent, €1,000 for childcare, and a real struggle to insure your car. That is what Imelda told me after the election. She is from Cork but now lives in Coolock and she voted for another winner, Deputy Mitchell. Change also means dealing with the climate emergency, not rhetorically or in the box-ticking way that the establishment do but really getting to grips with the green agenda.Change also means that the old order must pass. That is really what the problem is here because of course government formation is about numbers. We can add. Of course it is about policy coherence, no one is arguing to the contrary but government formation is also about power and who wields it. The reality is that Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael have run the show for almost a century and, by Christ, they are not minded to let go. That is really what all of this is about. People told me very clearly that they were voting for us to be in government . The 500,000 or more people who voted for us were clear that a vote for Sinn Féin was not a protest, it was a vote for a different Government - a Government that would have the courage, the imagination and the energy actually to do things differently, a Government that would put the citizen and families and communities front and centre, not big corporates, not the elites, not the well-networked, not the people that Deputy Micheál Martin used to knock around with in the Galway tent.Everybody who has been elected here is a winner, but the fact is, to do the maths, the winners were Sinn Féin, our colleagues in the Green Party, the Social Democrats and every party who said to the people there is a different and a better way to do government. I know in voting for us people said we want to give you the chance, we have seen the shambles, the same old same old same, the same problems persisting generation to generation on the watch of Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael and they said, ""Sinn Féin, show us what you're made of. Get in there, perform and deliver"".The real winners in the midst of all this need to be the people. That is what this is all about. I have not heard anybody ask Deputy Micheál Martin to stay quiet. Although I suggest that some in his party might proffer that advice to him. The reason the issue of mandate is such a big deal is because two parties – but let it be said, Fianna Fáil in particular – have decided, in an arrogant, dismissive, self-righteous way, to disregard entirely the representatives of more than 500,000 people.I will be honest: I do not really care what Deputy Micheál Martin thinks about me. I care less what he thinks about Sinn Féin. I will not take personal offence at that. What I will not tolerate and what is grossly offensive is to suggest to the citizens who vote for us that somehow uniquely their representatives are to be left in perpetuity on the sidelines because Deputy Michéal Martin does not like us.We could extol the past. We could all write books on that. We could all trade hurts and insults. That gets us nowhere. As a matter of fact mechanisms to deal with legacy and the past have been agreed. Deputy Micheál Martin should know this, I know that Deputy Varadkar knows this. They need to be legislated for. Rather than all of the bile that Deputy Micheál Martin exudes, the constructive thing to do is to commit his party to moving those structures forward and to get the British Government on board for that. The most important thing that needs to happen now is a serious attempt to form a new Government.Many people will speculate about what change means with regard to forming a Government. We have spoken about this before and share this view with colleagues. My first preference is for a left-leaning, progressive Government without Fianna Fáil or Fine Gael. We will continue to work for that. I also recognise that the very worst possible outcome from this election is Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael being back in government together. Not only do I think that would be a disastrous outcome, I will wager that the vast majority of people would regard that as a step backwards. I am very clear that is not what people voted for.I propose that we actually listen to what people have said in a generalised way about change, a new beginning and moving forward, then in a very specific way about specific policy items. We need to talk to each other about those things. If Deputy Micheál Martin is concerned about the democratic practices within my party, I am deeply concerned by a party and a leader who sat around a Cabinet table with people who were subsequently jailed for corruption. I have a problem with that and I think that most reasonable people have a problem with that. I trust that that is no longer the case within Fianna Fáil and I am sure that we will be assured that it is not the case. I also know that if one keeps reaching desperately for the past, it really says that one is not up for the future. It says that there is something profoundly wrong, arrogant and dysfunctional in one's political positioning. I hope that Deputy Martin will change that position but perhaps he will not. Whether he does or not, the people who vote for us are not going anywhere. They live here. They deserve good government and the respect of being heard. Nobody, including Deputies Micheál Martin and Leo Varadkar, will disrespect the people whom we represent. We have made a commitment to them to represent them well and to make our very best effort to deliver that Government of change. That is precisely what we intend to do."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-12-18	---	1	I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle for his kind words, even if they were not wholly truthful as regards the co-operation of some Members. I want to place on the record our great appreciation for the hard work and diligence of the staff of the Oireachtas. They often demonstrate their patience with all of us. This place simply could not function without them. Christmas is a time for family, for renewal and for hope. I wish everybody beannachtaí na féile. I hope people have an enjoyable Christmas. To those who are on my Christmas list and those who are not, Nollaig shona in equal measure.I heard an Leas-Cheann Comhairle's very wise words on how we should recall those on the margins and people who are struggling this Christmas. Sometimes when those words are said very sincerely, they sound rather hollow to those who are struggling. I would like us to make a new year's resolution that when we return we will make true and be true to that Christmas promise. I wish the leaders of Government, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil, a good rest as we undoubtedly head towards an election. I wish them well under the mistletoe as they snuggle up together over another Christmas season. I suggest that in the new year, the best present that could be brought is a new Government, new politics, new hope and renewal because those things are not just for Christmas.Why is An Leas-Cheann Comhairle looking at me?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-12-18	---	2	We all agree that manners need to be put on the insurance industry in this country. Insurance companies have been exposed for charging customers extortionate premiums, despite the fact that claims have fallen significantly and those same companies' profits continue to soar. There was general outrage when motorists discovered the extent to which they were being ripped off. There is an ongoing issue for every festival, playground, community organisation and GAA club with their insurance costs but now, disgracefully, our childcare services have fallen prey to the same greedy arrogant insurance industry.At the core of this problem is the fact that we rely on private provision for early childhood education and for childcare. That is the nub of it. The root of this problem is that childcare providers have no option but to rely on the vagaries of market forces and market providers which can decide whether they will open their doors. All of that needs to change and it is my strong belief that we need to move towards making early childhood education and care a public service. That is the answer to this but that will take considerable work. However, in the here and now, all those childcare providers, parents and childcare workers - who not alone do not have a structured career pathway, as Deputy Micheál Martin would have it, but are very low-paid, are in very insecure work and, for the most part, are women - want to know that the doors of the crèches will open in January. I am alarmed to hear the Taoiseach, on the one hand, speculate about the concern - it is actually panic - that families are feeling about all of this and, on the other hand, move to give a reassurance that registration of these crèches is in order and that they will open in January. The fact is if they do not have insurance cover, they will not be opening in January. The Taoiseach speculates that the new quotations and premiums will be reasonable but that is not the evidence we have heard from any number of providers. One in Tallaght, for example, with which Deputy Crowe has been working, has had a €1,000 hike in its premium. It provides for ten children, one of whom has special or additional needs. Other premium hikes range from €600 to €2,800. These are breathtaking additional costs and if they can be met by the provider, which is not a certainty, they will come out of the pocket of parents.We need Government intervention. The Taoiseach needs to give solid assurances to parents, childcare workers and providers that they will be able to operate in January. That means the Government has to step in.Simply to recommend to those families that they cross their fingers and hope the market will be good to them is frankly not good enough.Neither I nor previous contributors have said anything that is not factual. The facts of the matter are that very many childcare providers believe they will not be able to meet additional insurance costs and therefore may not be in a position to open their doors in January. They are the only facts we need to face. The last thing I want to do is cause panic or anxiety to any parent or childcare worker. Therefore, they have to have a more concrete response from the Government rather than the Taoiseach, with the greatest of respect to him, sounding like an advertisement for Allianz and say what a great provider it is. Perhaps it is, and perhaps its premiums will be reasonable, but that is a considerable gamble. It is a considerable statement for the Head of Government to make given what we know about insurance costs and the behaviour of insurance companies in this State.The Taoiseach asked me what he needs to do. He needs to give assurance to providers, parents and childcare workers that where those premiums are extortionate or cannot be met, the State will step in on an interim, one-off basis to assist those providers. That is not ideal, but as I said earlier, it is not ideal that we regard childcare and early years education as a matter for the private market. We need to fix that, but in the here and now the absolute priority is that people have complete assurance that their children will have a place in care in January and childcare workers will have jobs to go to. That is how serious this is. I will ask directly. In the event that Allianz does not meet the Taoiseach's high expectations and the premiums cannot be met by providers, will the State step in with a subvention or emergency fund to make sure the doors open in January?I am talking about costs.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-12-18	---	3	Women's Aid reported last month that its helpline had received 898 disclosures of where a man had told a woman he would kill her, the children, a family member or himself. Since the Women's Aid report was published, a sixth woman has died violently in Ireland this year. Jasmine, Elzbieta, Cathy, Skaidrite, Valerie and now Nadine have been killed. They have left 14 children without mothers. Our hearts go out to Nadine's family, particularly her young daughter. A total of 231 women have died violently in Ireland over the past 23 years, yet the State's response has been glacial. While the study commissioned by the Minister for Justice and Equality on familicide and domestic homicide reviews is welcome, it is two decades late. Ireland urgently needs to establish an independent multi-agency system of domestic homicide reviews, underpinned by legislation, similar to the reviews in Britain since 2011. The study team headed by Ms Norah Gibbons is due to complete its work in the middle of next year. I believe there is broad support right across the Dáil, certainly on this side, for the introduction of domestic homicide reviews. Will the Taoiseach commit Fine Gael to the establishment of such reviews on the completion of Ms Gibbons's study?Deputy Ó Snodaigh's tie is always a crowd-pleaser.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-12-11	---	1	"Last week, after the Taoiseach and his partners in Fianna Fáil reasserted their confidence in the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, I invited people to share their housing stories with me and they did, in their hundreds. Nothing could have prepared me for the trauma and heartache that those stories encapsulated. We have compiled some of those stories in a document entitled, The Humans of the Housing Crisis. I have sent it to the Taoiseach, the Minister, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, and their partner, Deputy Micheál Martin. I trust that the Taoiseach has read the document but it is important to place on the record of the Dáil some of the stories that were sent to me. The Taoiseach may have seen Kevin Maughan's letter to Santa Claus, covered in one of the newspapers this morning. He writes to Santa: ""Please come to my hotel again with Batman toys."" That is what he wants this year. Kevin is seven. He lives in emergency accommodation in County Clare with his parents and little sister. Kevin has developed asthma due to his homelessness because he has stayed in so many cold and damp places. Here is another letter:Hi, my landlord wants to sell her house, and myself, husband and my two small kids have to be out by February.We have nowhere to go. I am on the housing list over 13 years.Here is another:We both have decent jobs with good incomes...We rent a tiny studio apartment. We pay just over €1,000 for the privilege of tripping over each other and fighting over space...Due to the high rents and high cost of living in this city we live pay check to pay check with little or no savings. Saving for a mortgage is simply not possible for us and our insecure housing situation has forced us to put our lives on hold.Here is another:Hi, im a student and until recently was living in a converted shed in the back of the landlord’s house.I was cramped in there with two others. Rent is €500 and he only takes cash.When I gave in my month’s notice he forced me out immediately and took my deposit.Here is another:I am currently living with my partner’s parents. Four years now in an attic with our 11 year old son.We decided to take this step as the rent was absolutely spine-breaking. We both have really good jobs.We have been trying to attain a mortgage for the last four years with no success.This document is a catalogue of heartbreak, trauma and shattered dreams. It has been caused by the Government. What makes matters worse is that it does not have to be this way. All of these stories can be heard and answered with the right policy decisions. At this stage, the Taoiseach needs to accept and recognise the real harm, financial distress, mental anguish and even physical illness that is being caused to families and to children. He needs to change direction, and to recognise that there are solutions and adopt them. Does he now accept that we have a housing crisis that has no equal? Does he accept that we need to start a radical change in policy? Will he accept that we can start by dealing with extortionate rents? Will he commit to supporting the Sinn Féin legislation that has been debated and will come before the House for a vote tomorrow?It is significant that the Government has shirked its responsibilities and failed not just these families but countless others as well. The Government has stepped behind the shadow of private developers and landlords. The Taoiseach comes into this Chamber and endlessly recites figures and statistics and pats himself, the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, and their partner in government Deputy Micheál Martin on the back. The Taoiseach is trying to tell us that everything is okay, when it is clear that the Government's policy is failing and that things are not okay. For these families to be heard and to find solutions, they must be listened to. The Government has to care about them, as does the Taoiseach. People outside of politics have said to me that the problem with the housing, homelessness, and rental and affordability crises is that the Government does not care. At times, I challenged that assertion, because nobody wants to turn this into a personalised battle. However, when I observe the reactions of the head of Government and his colleagues - some of whom are smirking - to the human stories of loss and heartbreak, which are casualties of their failed policies, it raises the question of whether the Taoiseach cares.If he cared, he would not hide behind figures but would change policies. He could start tomorrow evening by backing a rent freeze and a tax credit for renters.Is that actually the Taoiseach's answer?The Taoiseach has no compassion.He is in his little Tory boy bubble with his colleagues."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-12-03	---	1	Ba mhaith liom comhghairdeas agus fáilte mhór a chuir roimh na Teachtaí Pádraig Ó Súilleabháin, Malcolm Byrne and Joe O'Brien and I welcome their families. This is a momentous and special day for all of them. The Leas-Cheann Comhairle will, I am sure, forgive me for extending a very special welcome to the man to my left - position-wise, not politically - Mark Ward. Mark is a very welcome addition to a very strong Sinn Féin team. I welcome his parents, Joan and Billy, and his son, the wonderful Oisin, who is a gifted and talented hurler.There was something in the stars for us Dubliners that on the day we lost Jim Gavin, we gained Mark Ward to this Parliament. The challenges that face all of us collectively and individually as political parties are very considerable. The message has come back loud and clear that the current Government of Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil is failing ordinary people. They have said that very loudly. It is incumbent on us Deputies in opposition, therefore, to set out our stall, not just of critique and analysis but of solutions and answers, which solutions and answers the people so desperately long for.I wish each of the Deputies a fair wind in this Dáil and I again congratulate their families. I take this opportunity to put one and all on notice that the battle is now on to change Ireland, to change politics in this State, to deliver for people and to plan for the decade ahead, a decade of opportunity in which we can rise to the challenges of our people. This in the end was the message sent to us from the doorsteps. I welcome Wardy on board the team and I thank our activists and the electorate who came out and cast their vote for Sinn Féin.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-12-03	---	2	Workers and families delivered a damning verdict on the Government's housing failures in the by-elections last weekend. Today, Sinn Féin has welcomed our newest TD, Deputy Mark Ward, to the Dáil. He is a Deputy who understands the impact that the Taoiseach's policy failure is having on the lives of ordinary people. His first job of work today will be to vote no confidence in the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy. That is the mandate he has been given. The people deserve better. People throughout the State tell us daily of their suffering under the Minister's housing failures. They must be listened to. They tell us of rents reaching highs of €2,000 per month, of years on waiting lists for a council house, of working every hour of the day with no prospect of ever owning their own homes and of scrimping and saving every last penny and still barely getting by.Every day, our newspapers are filled with the real human impact of the failure of Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael to tackle the housing crisis and today is no different. Today, Fr. Peter McVerry has written to  He tells of attending court with a young homeless boy who was charged with the theft of a bottle of orange of a value of €1. He also tells of a homeless man charged with the theft of four bars of chocolate of a value of €3, and another charged with the theft of two packets of Silk Cut cigarettes. He then contrasts that with a Deputy on his way to or from a very highly-paid second job in Brussels, who stops by at the Dáil to sign in so he can collect his full €51,600 of expenses for attendance at a Dáil that he does not in fact attend. Does that not illustrate how absolutely out of touch this Government is and how glaringly cut off it is from the realities facing ordinary people's lives? I understand that the Deputy in question will make a guest appearance today. He will be here, it seems, to save the bacon of the failed Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government.People deserve better than that. They deserve better than the nod-and-wink politics of jobs for the boys. They certainly deserve better than a housing Minister who lacks the ability or even the humility to admit and accept that his housing policy has failed. That policy is now in its fourth year and it is simply not delivering. In fact, the problem has got worse. Many of the families, young people and pensioners who may be listening to proceedings in this Dáil find their housing situation is grimmer than ever. It is not good enough to keep spinning, to try to explain things away or to ignore the problem that is evident. Business as usual will not suffice. We need solutions. People want affordable homes to rent and buy, they want measures to deal with out-of-control rents and they want radical solutions to these very real problems. The Minister does not have these solutions and he will not listen to those of us who are offering them.Does the Taoiseach accept that the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, is simply not up to the job and must go?I am not interested in self-congratulation or in any congratulation. I have raised with the Taoiseach the real experiences of people who cannot get a house and who do not have a home. I raise with the Taoiseach the scenario where children will wait for Santa Claus in bed and breakfasts, in hotels and in family hubs. I raise with the Taoiseach a situation where people live in the box-rooms of their parents' homes, including - in cases I know of - children with very severe health conditions and significant disabilities, some of whom are waiting for surgeries. I have raised with the Taoiseach the reality of what is a human misery, and I raise the fact that an entire generation of our people have no real hope that they will ever own their own homes. Those same people understand that they will struggle from month to month just to make the rent. The Taoiseach has failed again to address those realities. If the Taoiseach was to admit out loud that these things are rife across our society then he could land on no conclusion other than his policy is failing, that we need a change in policy and that we need a change in Minister. That is the logical outcome of the reality we face. I will put the question to the Taoiseach again. The Government's housing policy has failed. This is manifestly the case. We need a change in policy and a change in Minister. When will the Taoiseach deliver that?So, there is no harm done.Is it a figment of our imaginations, so?Come on.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-12-03	---	3	"I move:That leave be granted to introduce a Bill entitled an Act to provide for a period of paid leave as a consequence of domestic violence and for that purpose to amend the Organisation of Working Time Act 1997, to extend as a consequence the protection against unfair dismissals conferred by the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2015 and to provide for the consequential amendment of certain other enactments; and to provide for related matters.I am sharing time with Deputy Quinlivan as co-sponsor of the legislation.Domestic violence continues to be under-reported due to stigma, shame and fear. One in five women will experience violence in the home and 41% of women know someone in their circle of family or friends who has experienced intimate partner violence. Domestic violence is mostly spoken about in terms of the home but the reality is the abuse often follows victims into the workplace. Co-workers may be aware of a colleague's abuse but in the absence of workplace policy they may be unsure how best to support their colleagues. Managers need guidance on how to recognise the signs of domestic abuse and how to respond to a staff member's disclosure. Employers in the public and private sector must introduce domestic violence workplace awareness policies and procedures for management and staff.As legislators, we have a role in protecting women in the workplace and ensuring that the rights and entitlements of victims, as employees, are enhanced and protected. Our legislation provides for a statutory annual entitlement of up to ten days of domestic violence-related paid lead. This provision would enable victims to take the necessary time off work needed to seek support, find accommodation or attend court in a structured and supported environment. It also addresses unpredictable absenteeism and reduced productivity for employers.Earlier this year, Vodafone introduced ten days of domestic violence-related paid leave and additional support for its employees globally. New Zealand, Australia and provinces in Canada have all introduced forms of paid leave in this respect. Ireland's ratification of the Istanbul Convention and enactment of supporting legislation were very important landmarks and we must build on these. This Sinn Féin domestic violence-related paid leave Bill does just that and I commend it to the House.I move: ""That the Bill be taken in Private Members’ time."""
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-11-26	---	1	Accounts of experiences in our hospitals make for very grim reading in today's newspapers. Aaron is the father of a child who spent the weekend in Crumlin children's hospital. He said:We spent 24 hours with our child in A&E, a child with special needs. The place was like a warzone with the poor staff run off their feet. Our front line can't cope and hospitals are unsafe for patients and staff.We spoke to Aaron this morning and he wants us to record here that while this was the experience of his family over one weekend, they are very conscious that this is the experience of staff in our hospitals every single day.The daughter of an 83 year old woman attending University Hospital Limerick said of her mother:She was soaked, there was urine everywhere. She wasn't on a trolley, she was in the waiting room on the chair. They gave her some kind of pad and told her to sit on that.The family of a 73 year old man who had been on a trolley for 24 hours said:We're praying for a bed at this stage. They're trying to fit oxygen bottles to people in the corridors and the staff are just thrown to the wolves.A 76 year old woman in Limerick said:It's like a cattle market. There are trolleys everywhere.The INMO has again stated that the situation is intolerable for staff and unsafe for patients.These are the words and experiences of patients, relatives and hospital staff. This crisis is not new but is years in the making. Between them, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil have created a situation where 660 people are waiting on trolleys across the State, 33 of whom are children. Limerick, once again, has the highest number with 75 patients waiting on trolleys. I was in Cork yesterday and spoke to people in Knocknaheeny, Bishopstown and all across the north side of Cork. They tell stories of people suffering at Cork University Hospital. Today, 60 people are awaiting beds in Cork University Hospital. More generally, as has already been stated, the level of crisis in our hospitals is such that our three main children's hospitals postpone elective procedures. They have no choice. It is the only option they are left with.What will it take for the Taoiseach to accept and recognise the scale of the crisis facing sick people and their families because people are dying in hospital corridors and children are left in pain due to cancelled operations, which is not acceptable? The truth is that the Government's health policy has failed and this failure is having a devastating impact on the lives of patients but also on staff. Will the Taoiseach listen to the solutions that have been offered to him by nurses, midwives, hospital consultants' associations and patients? Those solutions involve increased recruitment, reopening closed beds and delivery of more step-down facilities but I ask the Taoiseach to specifically intervene on the matter of home help hours, bring provision to a level that will meet need and ensure patients are in a position to be discharged and to go home. I am asking him to give a commitment on this one matter and to at least signal that he will start to put right his disastrous health policy.The issue is not simply that accident and emergency departments are busy. To write this off as some kind of temporary busyness is, frankly, off the wall. Conditions are unsafe for patients and staff. This is not a new issue that is the result of any specific outbreak of a particular virus. This is a year-round, calendar-wide catastrophe for patients and their families such that many people are afraid to go into our hospitals. Being left on a trolley in undignified and degrading conditions and sitting on a chair in an accident and emergency department if one is lucky is the daily reality. As for the Government's capacity to deliver solutions, God help us if that is the Taoiseach's idea of coming up with solutions. All the Government has done is to make gestures in the direction of what needs to happen.The Taoiseach trumpets the additional 1 million home help hours when he knows that is not nearly sufficient. Just to clear the backlog, the waiting list, we need 2.5 million additional home help hours. How about the Government does things that have a prospect of success and actually allow people to go home?The failure to make the adequate allocation of home help hours has meant, for example, that in May of this year, almost 20,000 bed days were lost because of delayed discharges.In June, almost 19,000 bed days were lost. This is a mess and a catastrophe and it is time for the Taoiseach to step up, finish with alibis and excuses----------and start making progress for people who need our services.The Taoiseach is not delivering on those health policies.Good for the Taoiseach.Is that seriously the Taoiseach's answer to my question?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-11-20	---	1	Housing and securing a roof over one's head is, without question, the biggest dilemma facing many ordinary people. It is the biggest challenge facing workers and families in their daily lives. I was in Cork yesterday and I was greeted by the results of the Government's disastrous housing policies. In Fairhill, I met a young woman who is at her wits' end. She earns too much to be eligible for social housing but she cannot afford a mortgage. At Blackpool shopping centre, I spoke with one mother whose son faces daily stress because of the amount of rent he is paying. This young man lives in daily fear of eviction. I also visited Cork Penny Dinners, an outstanding organisation run by volunteers. It was once a soup kitchen but it now provides accommodation services. This charity has stepped up because of the mess Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil have created.Across the State, people are rightfully angry at the sight of boarded-up council houses. They are frustrated with each news report about rents reaching new record highs. They are baffled by the complete lack of delivery in respect of affordable housing. They are also angry at reports such as the one we heard earlier regarding the huge impact of homelessness on the physical and psychological health of children and babies. People are sick of this housing crisis and yet it seems to still just go on and on.There is a site in my constituency, O'Devaney Gardens, in respect of which the wrong decisions are being made again. We need homes in O'Devaney Gardens. We need affordable homes that will take families off housing lists and we need affordable rental homes. That is not what we are getting. The plan for the site, as concocted by the parties involved in the Dublin Agreement 2019 to 2024, is a dog's dinner. It is a stark example of everything that is wrong with housing policy in the State and it simply will not deliver in the context of meeting people's needs. These proposed homes will not be affordable for ordinary workers and families and there are no affordable rental homes. As it stands, the plan is a bonanza for the developer at the expense of the local community. Alarmingly, the team of Fianna Fáil, the Green Party, the Social Democrats and the Labour Party knew that their plan was a dog's dinner when they forced it through at Dublin City Council. We need to call a halt to the type of chance-your-arm politics that led to all of this mess in the first place. We need a change of direction and a change of plan. Sinn Féin has proposed the right scheme for the site with 33% social or council housing, 33% cost rental housing and 33% affordable housing for sale. There is a special meeting of Dublin City Council on Monday night to decide this matter. I call on Dublin City Council councillors to do the right thing and scrap this dog's dinner of a deal. I want them to support a new deal. I put it to the Minister that the Government should support a new scheme for O'Devaney Gardens and commit to resourcing that new plan.I might suggest that the Taoiseach go back to Cork, not for the purpose of a photo opportunity with a hard hat on, but to actually talk with the people who have told me, and who I am sure would tell him, of their huge anger and frustration. The houses are not available and there is no point in the Minister trying to bamboozle people with statistics. The lived reality is that people cannot get houses. They pass by boarded-up homes, which adds insult to injury.In the context of O'Devaney Gardens, we are left in a situation where the use of public land will give rise to a big windfall for the developer and the community will be left in the lurch. On the one hand, we are caught between Fine Gael, which does not know what affordability means and whose plan brought forward no affordable purchase homes, and Fianna Fáil, the Labour Party, the Green Party and the Social Democrats, who cobbled together, mar dhea, a dog's dinner of a so-called deal just to get the proposal through the council. They misled Dublin City Council, they misled the general public and, most damningly, they misled the community living in that part of the inner city.I again put it to the Minister that these plans with Bartra be put aside and that we collectively do the right thing, which is absolutely doable and achievable, and deliver real, affordable homes, affordable rental homes and the much-needed council housing. This can still be done but we need people to step up and move away from the Fianna Fáil brand of chancing the arm, winging it and hoping to get away with it.This is a disgrace. What is happening on the site is an absolute disgrace----------and the Government is duty bound to intervene.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-11-20	---	2	The programme for Government commits to prioritising the prevention and reduction of crime by providing investment in An Garda Síochána. Last week, my colleague, Deputy Jonathan O'Brien, raised with the Taoiseach the crisis in Garda resources in Cork city and referred to reports showing that just two gardaí were available for patrol on one particular night. He asked the Taoiseach to meet the Garda Commissioner to raise these matters. The Taoiseach told Deputy O'Brien in response that he had not had time to speak to the Commissioner. I do not know whether he has made time to do so since then.I was in Cork yesterday with Deputy O'Brien and our colleague, Councillor Thomas Gould, where I heard at first hand about the impact of this lack of Garda resources on communities in the city. Playgrounds have been destroyed, people are fearful to socialise in their own areas and there is desperate carry-on on the streets of the city, with intimidating and threatening behaviour from a small cohort of young people.Today we learned that specially trained gardaí cannot take up their positions in a long-promised sexual offences investigation unit in west Cork because of a lack of personnel. Does the Government agree that the people of Cork have a right to feel safe on the streets of the city and in their homes? Does the Government appreciate that there is a real crisis in Garda resources and, if so, what does it propose to do about it?Will the Minister for Justice and Equality come to the House to make a statement on the lack of Garda resources in Cork?Not in Cork.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-11-05	---	1	Ar mo shon féin agus ar son Shinn Féin, déanaim comhbhrón le clann agus cairde Gay Byrne.Gay Byrne's contribution to the public discourse as both a journalist and broadcaster was immense and enduring. From the early days of RTÉ until the present, he occupied a very special place in the hearts and minds of many Irish people. Since news of his passing yesterday afternoon, Gay Byrne has rightfully received tributes as a broadcaster without equal. It is fair to say that he changed the nature of broadcasting in the State and reshaped how we discuss many important issues. Gay Byrne made a massive contribution to Irish life, a contribution that very often transcended broadcasting itself. In many respects, his voice narrated the story of the State for more than three decades. It is a testament to his talent and his ability that even at times when one did not agree with him one could still recognise the importance of the work he did.If it is possible to describe Gay Byrne's legacy simply, I would say it is that he got people talking about issues that they very often did not want to talk about. He shifted a code of silence that ran through generations. He turned the key. He built a stage on which people could tell their stories and he will be very greatly missed.I extend my condolences and those of Sinn Féin to his wife, Kathleen, his daughters, Suzy and Crona, to the wider family circle and to his many friends. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam dílis. Ní bheidh a leithéid ann arís.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-11-05	---	2	"I raise again with the Taoiseach the dangerous overcrowding in our hospitals. I raise it again today because of figures released by the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation, INMO, indicating that 679 patients are waiting today without beds in Ireland's hospitals. This is the highest daily figure of 2019 and the second highest ever recorded. The INMO has rightly described this as ""obscene"" and it has told us its members are faced with inhumane working conditions, with patients being put at increased risk. This is a very familiar story and I and others have consistently raised these matters with the Taoiseach. Yet here we are again today with 679 patients without beds. Not all are on trolleys as in some cases there is not even a trolley.The Taoiseach should imagine he needs to go to hospital today because he is sick or experiencing an emergency. He would already be worried and his family would be worried. He should imagine how he would feel, knowing our hospitals are creaking under the strain and pressure they face. It would be an upsetting or terrifying experience.This is not just a matter of numbers. This is about people who deserve far better than the perpetual crisis that the Government visits on our health service. What we have witnessed on the Government's watch is a complete and utter failure in health policy. For eight years now, Governments have failed to make any inroads into tackling the trolley crisis. We have had three Fine Gael Ministers for Health, including the Taoiseach, and things have not got any better. In fact, the situation gets worse by the month and year. Record numbers of people have been left on trolleys for the first ten months of this year. As we progress deeper into the winter, this problem will become more acute. Last week, the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation published figures showing that 11,452 patients in Irish hospitals were left without beds in October. These numbers should cause alarm bells to ring. They reflect the fact that the Government has failed to tackle this real and immediate pressure.As I have said previously, to address the crisis, the Government can and should do a number of things around recruitment and retention of staff, the reopening of closed beds, step-down facilities, more home help hours and investment in primary and community care. Given that the Taoiseach has consistently ignored those pleas, what does he have to say today to the staff and patients in University Hospital Limerick, which again has the highest number of people on trolleys, and Cork University Hospital, which has the second highest number and has been under extraordinary pressure for some time? What does he have to say to the staff working in dangerous conditions and the patients, in particular the 674 patients who are left today without a bed?The Taoiseach regularly recounts his professional curriculum vitae for the House. From my point of view, the very fact that he is a medical professional, a doctor, and that he has worked in the public health system makes this all the more shocking and intolerable.The Taoiseach has recounted the actions his Government has taken but the figures do not lie. In October, unless the Taoiseach contests the figure, 11,452 patients were left with no beds. Despite the list of actions he has set out, this is what we are left with. I am glad the Minister for Health met the CEO of the HSE but I would not hold out any great hope that much will come of that meeting. I have a suggestion for the Taoiseach. He mentioned 1 million additional home help hours but I suggest that this be increased to 2.5 million because that is what is needed to clear the waiting list. The 1 million additional hours will simply relieve the pressure regarding 40% of the waiting list. Let us do something radical and imaginative. Let us actually try something with a prospect of working and allocate the 2.5 million home help hours that are required.I suppose Sinn Féin is responsible for the trolley count too."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-10-23	---	1	"As has been said, 600,000 households in counties Dublin, Kildare and Meath are today subject to a boil water notice. I heard the Irish Water customer service manager on radio this morning, who was unclear on how long the notice would last. She speculated that it might be a number of days, as the Taoiseach has just said. The lack of clarity will do very little to assure or comfort the 600,000 families affected. I am particularly concerned about families with young children, older citizens and those with illnesses.For them, this is not just an inconvenience; it is a source of real stress and worry.Of course, we can be sure this is not the only boil water notice that has been issued this year. In 2018, 44 boil water notices were issued, affecting 14 counties and, in 2017, 21 notices were issued. The one currently in place is the biggest ever issued in the State.An incident at Leixlip water plant gave rise to this boil water notice. It is not yet fully clear what happened at Leixlip; we simply do not know. We do know that there was a previous incident at the Leixlip water plant in March of this year. At that time, a pump failure compromised the quality and purity of the water. In response to that incident, the office of environmental enforcement of the EPA carried out an audit. That audit was published on 3 April this year and issued specific recommendations and stipulated that Irish Water must submit a report to the agency within one month of the date of publication, which was by May 2019.We do not know if the incident yesterday is related to the previous incident in March. We do not know if it was a repetition of the incident in March but we need to find out. As the Taoiseach said, Leixlip is a relatively new water plant and, like many water plants, it is privately run under the design, build and operate public private partnerships, PPPs, so beloved of, and delivered by, Fianna Fáil.Families need to know that the treatment and provision of their water is to the highest standard. They need to know that water plants are managed and operated properly. Does the Taoiseach know if the incident yesterday is related to the incident at the same plant in March? Did Irish Water respond to the EPA report of that time within the month stipulated and were the recommendations addressed? Is the Taoiseach satisfied that the design, build and operate contract in operation at that plant in Leixlip is fit for purpose?It does.That is incorrect.I thank the Taoiseach. He is correct that this issue affects my constituency and my home as well as the Taoiseach's home and those of many others. People need reassurances on two levels. It is not good enough to say, ""This boil water notice will be lifted some time but we cannot specify when"". I agree that there must be an interaction with Irish Water and some clearer information delivered.A bigger assurance than that is required. We need to know whether the latest incident is the same as, or related to, the incident last March. I have the EPA's audit report from that time, the Ceann Comhairle will be pleased to hear. Last March, there was a pump failure which resulted in a temporary loss of the cryptosporidium barrier at the plant. I want to know whether that is what happened this time. I also want the Taoiseach to investigate and satisfy himself that the plant at Leixlip and the contract, which is a private contract, is reliable and fit for purpose to protect the water supply to these 600,000 homes and many more."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-10-23	---	2	The past 24 hours have been devastating for job losses in Munster. As has been mentioned, 500 jobs are to go in Shannon and now 320 jobs in Ringaskiddy, Cork. I am sure the workers concerned and their families are crushed by this news. The Government needs to be proactive on this. I know the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation is in Shannon today, following the job losses there. I hope she will also visit Cork and speak to the workers there. I hope the unions and other worker representatives can obtain the best possible conditions for workers in this scenario. Will the Minister immediately commence the process of seeking funding from the European Globalisation Fund to assist the workers losing their jobs in their search for new employment?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-10-23	---	3	As I have not seen the proposal in written format, I seek clarification on whether Deputies Niall Collins, Dooley and Lisa Chambers will make personal statements to the House. I am not sure if Deputy Cowen is involved in this as well.I understand that a facility was made available to the Fianna Fáil Deputies.Can the Ceann Comhairle clarify whether statements will be made?I appreciate that.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-10-22	---	1	"I want to raise the controversy that has struck at the integrity of the voting system of the Dáil. Over the weekend, as we know, it emerged that Deputy Niall Collins voted on behalf of Deputy Dooley on six separate occasions. Subsequently, questions have been asked of other Dáil Deputies as to whether they cast votes for absent colleagues.This has been portrayed by some as a controversy over who sits in what seat - a game of political musical chairs, Deputies sit in the wrong seats and press the wrong buttons. We must acknowledge that the real world outside looks on gobsmacked at the fact that highly-paid officials cannot manage to sit in the right seats or hit the right buttons. I suggest that we collectively decide that, from hereon in, we will sit in our designated seats and endeavour to press the right buttons. That would resolve the concerns over musical chairs.The real story here is much more serious and alarming because Deputies have cast votes on behalf of colleagues who are not present before also casting their own vote and, thereby, voting twice on a given question. Article 15 of Bunreacht na hÉireann states that the decisions of this House are determined by a majority of the votes of Members who are present and voting. Our own Standing Orders echo that position. Standing Order 77 explicitly sets out that Members must be present to vote. We are elected to make laws, amend laws, pass budgets and make decisions that impact society and the lives of real people. Measures have been voted on in this House that have denied respite care, taken away home help hours, prevented meaningful action on runaway rents and I could go on. It is because of the gravity and reach of our decisions that we must be present and vote. That is why it is spelled out so explicitly in the Constitution and Standing Orders.The behaviour of Fianna Fáil Deputies has discredited the Dáil. It conveys a complete lack of regard for the Oireachtas and institutions of governance. It demonstrates, above all, an absolute disrespect for those who have elected those Deputies and who they represent but it is even more serious than that because if the behaviour of the Fianna Fáil Deputies represents a pattern of behaviour in that party, it calls into question the validity of decisions and votes taken here. That is how serious it is to vote on behalf of a colleague who is not present or to vote twice on any given issue.I ask the Taoiseach for his response to this. Beyond the investigation that has been ably taken up by the Ceann Comhairle, how are we to establish whether this practice is, and has been, widespread? How will we deal with the consequences of that?Over the course of the weekend I was asked by somebody in my constituency whether it would be okay if they showed up at a polling station and voted for their friend because their friend could not make it. Of course, the answer was, ""No, absolutely not."" There cannot be one law or standard for citizens and the electorate and a different one for Deputies. The real concern is beyond the antics of Deputies Niall Collins and Dooley and others in Fianna Fáil. Is this a pattern of behaviour? Was it an isolated incident, or is there some unwritten, implicit or explicit agreement between some Deputies that it is all right to cast a vote for colleagues who are not present? That needs to be established. I absolutely accept, a Cheann Comhairle, that you will do your work diligently in respect of last Thursday's turn of events, but the big question for the people is whether it is how we do our business here. That is what citizens are asking. Aside from not sitting in the correct seats and the almost farcical comedy it was, is something else at play? How will we establish if that is the case? Beyond the inquiry and investigation that will be carried out by the Ceann Comhairle, how will we establish whether this is a pattern of behaviour engaged in by Fianna Fáil in the House and how will we deal with the matter? What is the Taoiseach's view, as Head of Government?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-10-16	---	1	I thank the Ceann Comhairle. I take it the lads have simmered down now.Grainne Gault is due to protest at the gates of the Dáil this afternoon. On St. Patrick's Day last year, Grainne lost her beautiful 14 year old daughter Elisha to suicide. In the wake of Elisha's death, Grainne and her family have been incredibly courageous. She and the group, Mental Health Warriors, have voiced their concerns about the state of mental health supports and provisions for children and adolescents. Ms Gault kept Elisha's Facebook page open as a place where distressed young people could come for help and support. Sadly, Elisha's story is not an isolated case. Many of our young people today struggle with mental health difficulties and, more generally, we also have a serious mental health crisis in our country. The rate of death by suicide is frightening. Over the last two years, 744 people died by suicide. That is 744 families such as the Gaults who now live with an unbearable loss every day. We need a unified approach and common purpose in mental health, right across the political spectrum. In that spirit, I must tell the Taoiseach that his Government is failing to deliver adequate mental health services. Despite all the talk and nice words, we are not seeing real improvements in services. While talking helps one's mental health and it is good and necessary to talk, it is the Government's responsibility to back that up with services.The Government's failure is most evident in the child and adolescent mental health service, CAMHS, which is on its knees. It is crumbling while families and communities cry out for help, which the Government is not providing. Staffing shortages have led to CAMHS beds lying empty and children waiting months for mental healthcare. In August, 2,440 children were waiting for mental health services. Half of those children were waiting at least 12 weeks to be seen, while 748 were waiting six months. That is far too long to wait when a young person's health, and possibly life, hangs in the balance.There is also a problem with children being admitted to adult mental health units. My colleague, Deputy Cullinane, highlighted the fact that eight children were admitted to adult facilities in 2018 in Waterford alone. Capacity is not matching the scale of need. The targets set in A Vision for Change in 2009 are not yet being met, over a decade later. In last week's budget, the Government announced a paltry and pathetic €14 million in new money for all mental health services. Providing a seven-day outpatient model for CAHMS would cost just over €3 million, which is almost a quarter of the Government's inadequate allocation of new money. The 2020 budget represented a real opportunity for the Government to do better on mental health services, which it could have seized. Having failed to do so, I ask the Taoiseach to seize that opportunity now and commit to delivering the necessary investment that families like the family of Elisha, whose mother Gráinne will be at the gates this afternoon, expect and deserve.We are only going to get this right if we start from a factual position and if there is no delusion on anybody's part. The death of Elisha Gault, the child I mentioned, was not captured in the official statistics. She is not officially recorded as a death by suicide. Instead of claiming - I believe erroneously - that deaths by suicide are falling, the Taoiseach would be better served by looking at those real live statistics and understanding that they do not represent the full picture. The Taoiseach rattled off figures to me, citing a figure of €40 million. However, only €14 million of that is new money. That is a fact.I am sure the Taoiseach understands that A Vision for Change from 2009 was one of those fairly rare occasions when people right across political and public life agreed that this is the plan and the way forward. Despite this, more than ten years later the plan has not been delivered. It has not been resourced and it has not been funded.Here is the rub. The Taoiseach can bat this issue off with me today. However, families across the land, perhaps watching this exchange and listening to him as the Head of the Government, are in desperate situations. They have children and young people who are self-harming and who go missing.They have children and young people in real distress. They cannot get the services they need. Despite the Taoiseach rattling figures at me, the reality on the ground is that the Government has failed to fund these services.I want to offer the Taoiseach the opportunity again to make a commitment to fund these services properly. This is not to satisfy me but to satisfy the needs of the communities and families who rely on them.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-10-16	---	2	I raise with the Taoiseach again the case of Emma DeSouza. I raised it with him yesterday and he informed the House that he was counting on a review that had been undertaken on the watch of former British Prime Minister, Theresa May. I told him yesterday that that response was wholly inadequate but, more to the point now, Emma DeSouza has reflected the fact that this review is inadequate. She questions whether there is, in fact, a review. The belligerence and the intent of the British Home Office and the British system is very clear. It is to insist, without consent, that Irish people living in the North are, in fact, British. The Taoiseach shares a common purpose to resolve this issue. What exactly does he propose to do now - now - to sort out this matter?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-10-15	---	1	Yesterday, the High Court in Belfast ruled that people born in the North of Ireland are British citizens even where they identify as and are Irish. The ruling was made in the case of Emma DeSouza. Emma has fought a long and admirable campaign with the British Home Office to be legally recognised as an Irish citizen only. Emma's case is well known and has become a symbol of the need to protect Irish identify and citizenship in the North. Despite the fact her right to identify solely as an Irish citizen had been upheld at a number of tribunal hearings, the British Home Office dragged Emma through the courts to overturn that decision. She believes, with good reason, that this represents a hardline effort on the part of the British Government to restrict access to EU entitlements for citizens in the North of Ireland following Brexit.Yesterday's ruling represents a clear effort by the British Government to undermine the Good Friday Agreement. In fact, the ruling tramples all over the agreement. That agreement is crystal clear that those born in the North of Ireland are entitled to identify as British, Irish, or both. However, the British Home Office refuses to recognise Emma DeSouza as an Irish-only citizen resident in the North of Ireland and, in so doing, it refuses to recognise the core legal component of the Good Friday Agreement.The decision has also exposed the failure of successive British Governments to enshrine the relevant provisions of the Good Friday Agreement in domestic law. The identity and citizenship provisions are critical to the integrity of the agreement as a whole and they must be protected and defended to the hilt. The British Home Office must acknowledge the birthright provisions of the Good Friday Agreement and allow Emma to assert her full rights as an Irish and EU citizen. They must also understand that it is unacceptable to pursue a young woman through the courts for simply being Irish, especially when her position had already been legally vindicated.More than 20 years after the signing of the Good Friday Agreement, the British Government continues to fail in its responsibilities as a co-guarantor. Those failures must be challenged. The Taoiseach told us that Irish citizens in the North would never again be left behind by an Irish Government and he now needs to follow through on those words and that promise. The Government, as a co-guarantor of the Good Friday Agreement, has a key role to play. The Taoiseach needs to step up and defend Emma, her rights and the rights of all Irish citizens in the North. Can he indicate what the Government proposes to do to defend the Good Friday Agreement in light of this ruling?The Good Friday Agreement is not only eloquent but it is also crystal clear on the right of any citizen to be recognised as Irish, as British or as both. As the Taoiseach has acknowledged, Emma is an Irish citizen. She carries an Irish passport, and despite the clarity around her identity and citizenship, Emma has been blackguarded and pursued through the courts by a very hostile and belligerent British system.I appreciate that the Taoiseach has raised these matters in the past with Mrs. May, that he has raised them with the Secretary of State, and that he will do so again. I put it to him, however, that simply raising the issue is not sufficient. We need a resolution to this matter and it needs to happen in a speedy fashion. Emma is very clear in her understanding of the hostility of the Home Office towards her and Jake, her American-born husband. She has also flagged for all of us the reality that that same British system is seeking to deny, frustrate or rob Irish citizens, and therefore EU citizens, of their citizenship rights in the North of Ireland in a post-Brexit scenario. I ask the Taoiseach to do more than politely raise this matter. I invite him to insist that the Prime Minister, Boris Johnson, moves speedily to introduce the required legislation through Westminster to ensure that Irish citizens living in Ireland are recognised and respected as Irish.And get no result.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-10-09	---	1	Yesterday, the Minister for Finance announced an increase in carbon tax as part of budget 2020. The Government pushed ahead with a tax increase that it knows will disproportionately hit the vulnerable and low paid. The Government knows this because it has been told. The ESRI and the Department of Finance have told the Taoiseach that poorer households, rural areas and lone parents will bear the brunt of this decision. The Taoiseach should be in no doubt that his increase in carbon tax will deepen poverty and inequality. It will make life harder for those families that are just about getting by.This is not a climate action measure. It is not about making Ireland greener or cleaner and it is certainly not about changing people's behaviour. In order for carbon taxes to influence behavioural change, they have to be supported by investment and we have all of the evidence of this fact here in Ireland. The existing carbon tax has generated €400 million every year since 2015 without changing behaviour or Government policy and, critically, emissions are not dropping. This shows that we must provide people with alternatives for them to transition to a low-carbon lifestyle. That means investing properly in order to give viable alternatives in terms of transport, fuel and heating, but the Government is not doing this. Presenting this regressive tax as a climate action measure is a hoodwink, a ruse and an attempt to dupe people into believing that the Government is taking the climate crisis seriously when nothing could be further from the truth. The carbon tax hike is not climate action. At best, it might be called tinkering or a half measure. At worst, it is another PR stunt the bill for which is passed on to workers, families and pensioners. This will not change people's behaviour but it will make people poorer. The Government plans to keep increasing this tax over a ten-year period and therefore chooses to go after ordinary households rather than the big polluters and those most able to shoulder the burden. That is classic Fine Gael. Whenever there is a cost for the damage caused by those at the top, Fine Gael likes nothing better than to send the bill to the ordinary people.Everybody accepts that we all have to do more and that we have to do better. We all have a part to play in meeting the challenge of climate change and we only have a few short years to rise to the challenge. I want the Taoiseach to do the right thing. I want him to pursue an alternative that will actually work. I want him to fund climate action through progressive taxation and then invest in a real plan in transport, energy infrastructure and a massive home retrofitting programme. That is what the Taoiseach should have announced yesterday. The morning after the day before, I ask him to do the right thing and to drop this carbon tax increase.The history of carbon taxes in this jurisdiction is that they have not had the effect of reducing emissions. That is just a fact. It has been patchy but the trajectory is going in the wrong direction. The Government has had €400 million per annum to invest to support behavioural changes and it has failed abjectly. This is a case of the Government believing its own hype and propaganda. I am well aware, by the way, of what young people expect from us. I live with two young people who are very clear what they want to see. They want to see meaningful actions. That does not mean box-ticking by the Taoiseach to make himself look good and to don his new green credentials. The hike in the carbon tax is going to hurt poorer households. It is going to hurt lower-income people who are at work and do not qualify for a fuel allowance. It is going to hurt people living in substandard accommodation who cannot afford to retrofit their homes. The budget yesterday, the same budget that proposes this hike in carbon tax, was pathetically inadequate in terms of supports for those families in any respect but particularly in terms of retrofitting.I put it to the Taoiseach that he is a green poseur and nothing more than that. He is not serious about climate action but he is serious about hammering those families and workers who ought to have been given a break yesterday.They see through the Taoiseach.That is really bad-----
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-10-02	---	1	Last year's crime figures make for very sobering reading. Right across the country, people are experiencing big problems with criminality and anti-social behaviour. People in towns and villages across rural Ireland live in fear of burglary and break-ins and this, in turn, has a devastating effect on community and family life. Knife and drug crime are now a daily concern and, indeed, a daily reality for people living in our cities. It is very sad that encountering crime has become normalised for so many of our citizens. It is not too much to ask to be able to walk safely down one's street or to be able to sleep soundly in one's bed. It is not too much to ask that young people can go out to enjoy themselves at night and come home safely.All of us have the right to go about our business and our lives with a basic sense of security. I am sure the Taoiseach will agree. I will reflect on the realities of Dublin's north inner city. The figures reported today show that the crime rate for this area is five times higher than the national rate. As the Taoiseach knows well, the north inner city is home to the very finest of people, families and communities. They certainly do not deserve to be afflicted with, or to be worn down by, criminals and anti-social elements. The people of the north inner city should not have to constantly fight for the ownership of their communities. They should not live with the scourge of criminals who thrive on the misery and fear of families. I want to be very clear; crime is not unique to Dublin nor the north inner city. One only has to pick up a local newspaper in any part of the country to understand how crime impacts communities in every single county.These figures raise very serious questions in respect of the resourcing of An Garda Síochána and raise serious questions of the Minister for Justice and Equality and of the Taoiseach, as Head of Government. It is clear that the north inner city deserves much better and that we need a more proactive approach not only in that part of the city, but right across the State. The Government cannot simply turn away. We need to agree that there is no acceptable level of crime anywhere. I am sure that when the Taoiseach saw these figures today he was just as shocked as I was. I am sure that he is as sincerely concerned for families in the north inner city as I am. Concern, however, will only go so far. We now need action. There are things the Taoiseach could do now, in the immediate term, that would help this community and others.Why are we still waiting for the reopening of Fitzgibbon Street Garda station? It is still closed despite being situated in the area that has a crime rate five times higher than that of other areas across the State. Why was the north inner city community policing forum, which was the go-to place for the community to engage with An Garda Síochána, closed down last June? Will the Taoiseach commit to reopening this forum without delay? Will he tell us now when Fitzgibbon Street Garda station will be reopened?I agree with the Taoiseach that it is not only about zero tolerance for crime and criminality but also zero tolerance for poverty, exclusion and the scourge of addiction. On that point we agree. It is beyond explanation that we are still waiting for Fitzgibbon Street Garda station to be reopened when it is located in the area with the highest crime rate in the State. Frankly, it is beyond belief that, in June, the Government closed the community policing forum in an area with a crime rate five times higher than the average rate in the State. The Taoiseach may say he is pulling out all the stops and doing all he can, but people and families living in the area with the highest crime rate - five times the State average - see a Garda station in the heart of this area that is still closed. They know their community policing forum was closed down as recently as June.Therefore, I want the Taoiseach to provide more concrete explanations and, more important solutions. We need a date for the reopening of Fitzgibbon Street Garda station. We need to know that the community policing forum will be reopened. Anything short of that will, to the ears of the families of those living in the north inner city, sound very much like rhetoric and crocodile tears. It will add nothing to their sense of safety and security in their home area.May I say, just before the Taoiseach responds, that----------the Ceann Comhairle allowed Deputy Micheál Martin to run over by one minute and 11 seconds?It was not; it was one minute and 11 seconds.Sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-10-02	---	2	Yesterday, I raised with the Taoiseach the chronic overcrowding in our hospitals. I echoed the concerns of the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation, INMO, which has told us that this crisis is putting patient care at risk and has described the situation as being beyond unsustainable. Today, we woke to the news that University Hospital Limerick has 82 patients without beds, the highest figure ever recorded in any hospital. In September, over 1,400 patients in Limerick were without beds. Today, it breaks the record for the number of people on trolleys. Yesterday, the Taoiseach said it was not simply a matter of beds. The issue in Limerick today is a simple matter of capacity and beds. Yesterday, the Taoiseach, quite correctly apologised. The reality is, however, that an apology is not enough. What is his plan for University Hospital Limerick? It is a disgraceful hospital in terms of the record-breaking number of people on trolleys.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-10-01	---	1	I raise the issue of the dangerous overcrowding in our hospitals. Today's figures from the INMO are really shocking. As of this morning, there were 610 patients on hospital trolleys. That includes 81 people on trolleys in University Hospital Limerick, 58 people on trolleys in Cork University Hospital, and 50 people on trolleys in the Mater, in my own constituency in Dublin. The list goes on and on. Behind these figures are people who deserve better treatment and decent healthcare. This morning 610 families were worried sick about loved ones, whether parents, grandparents or children, lying on trolleys in a corridor instead of on hospital beds, where they belong.I have told the Taoiseach on many occasions that his health policies are not working but it is clear that he does not listen. This September was the worst September on record with regard to hospital overcrowding. Some 10,641 patients went without a hospital bed. That is 10,641 families who had to see a loved one suffer the indignity of a hospital trolley. Landing in a hospital for whatever reason can be a very frightening experience but to find oneself in hospital to be told that one has to make do with a trolley only worsens the anxiety one experiences.The INMO is absolutely scathing in its assessment of the current situation. It says chronic hospital overcrowding is placing massive strain on nurses and seriously worsening patient care. It says chronic hospital overcrowding is beyond unsustainable. All of this is on the Taoiseach's watch. It is a direct result of the policy choices of his Government. There is no point in coming in here time and again talking about supposed progress and success around the edges of what is a crisis. That is just not good enough. Publicity initiatives around Sláintecare are not good enough either because it has to be implemented in a way that makes a noticeable difference on the front line. Patients and their families are at this stage tired of the Government's ready-steady-stop approach.Fianna Fáil might be well prepared to stand aside and allow this to continue but we will not. We cannot any longer tolerate a health service dragged into a perpetual state of crisis by the Government's policies and inaction. There are 610 people lying on trolleys today. There are 610 families worrying about them. Can the Taoiseach tell them whether he is finally going to take action that will actually work?I am glad the Taoiseach has apologised to the patients and their families. That is the very least they deserve. More than an apology is needed, however. Those patients and others, and any families who finds themselves in this situation, actually want change and a solution to this matter. The Taoiseach comes in here as a matter of routine and recites the actions he claims to have taken and numbers of beds and so on but the reality is that the system does not have the capacity necessary to deliver the care that the patients need.Today, Sinn Féin launched its budget proposal for 2020. In it, we include additional hospital beds, recruitment of additional nurses and midwives, and pay equalisation for consultants. All of these measures are well within the Government's fiscal capacity. Can the Taoiseach, in addition to apologising to the families and patients, give an absolute guarantee that there will be sufficient investment in our health services in the budget next week so we do not have to endure these scandalous figures time and again?What about beds?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-09-25	---	1	I join others in extending heartfelt thoughts to Mr. Lunney and his family. He is the father of six children. I met him in recent months to discuss Brexit. As others set out, the attack on him was utterly vile and criminal and every effort must be made to bring those responsible to justice. It is also worth saying the attack does not represent the standards or spirit of people who live in the Border region. Those who acted in this way did so of their own accord.Yesterday we watched as the latest chapter of the Boris Johnson Brexit circus unfolded in London. The Supreme Court in Britain ruled that Mr. Johnson's suspension of Parliament was unlawful. The British Prime Minister was caught out in his latest bluff by the courts. Let us be in no doubt that he is wedded to his Hallowe'en Brexit strategy, come what may. He refuses to accept the democratic decision of the people in the North who voted to remain in the European Union. It is clear that he lacks the maturity or skill necessary to deal with the complexities of his country's departure from the European Union. His international credibility is in absolute tatters after the latest debacle.The real challenge for us in Ireland is to ensure we do not become bedazzled, or distracted, by the latest instalment of the great Westminster soap opera. If the British Prime Minister wants to disrespect his office and duties, that is his problem, but we cannot allow it to become Ireland's problem. His stupid and dangerous Brexit fantasy cannot become Ireland's nightmare. Despite the chaos that is enveloping the British political system, he has said he will push ahead with Brexit on 31 October. He has also said he has an operable alternative to the agreed backstop. He has stated he has an operable plan to avoid the reimposition of a hard border on this island. We have all waited a long time for the British Government to produce workable solutions that are grounded in sense and reality. If Mr. Johnson does, in fact, have such a plan, this is the time for him to produce it, but I do not believe he has a plan. His behaviour in the past two months, since he entered 10 Downing Street, suggests such pragmatism is beyond him. I believe he has deluded himself into believing he can hoodwink Ireland and the European Union. It is the Taoiseach's responsibility to call his bluff because far too much is at stake for the sense of entitlement of the British Prime Minister to be entertained. The peace agreements, the economy and the rights of Irish people are on the line. In his arrogance Mr. Johnson perhaps believes Ireland will be the collateral damage in the Tory Brexit. He needs to be put straight that that will not happen. He needs a dose of reality. The Taoiseach met Mr. Johnson yesterday - Athena and Hercules in conclave - in New York. I want the Minister to confirm for the Dáil that the Taoiseach has reiterated to the Prime Minister that the backstop remains the bottom line, that the guarantees contained within it cannot be bartered away and that there will be no circumstances in which we can countenance the return of a hard border. The people of Ireland, North and South, need that reassurance today.I welcome the clarification. It is very important, as the clock ticks down and people become very anxious about what might happen at Hallowe'en, that the Government, as well as political leaders across the Dáil Chamber generally, remain firm in their resolve to secure and deliver the bottom line, the least worst option, which is the backstop. No one here is pretending that it is the all-encompassing answer to Brexit, which was always bad news for us. We should not be led into a cul-de-sac in having to choose between the Single Market and the Good Friday Agreement, the all-island economy and citizens' rights. The task for all of us is to secure all of them. When does the Taoiseach intend to brief Opposition leaders again about his conversations with the Prime Minister, Boris Johnson, and the political plan for what might happen if Britain crashes out of the European Union? All of the things the Minister listed - the avoidance of a hard border, protection of the Good Friday Agreement, North-South co-operation, the all-island economy, to which I would add citizen's rights, and our position in the Single Market - are still imperatives if and when Britain crashes out of the European Union. We need a plan to secure them come what may.Yes.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-09-25	---	2	There are reports in the media today of Irish hospitals hiring debt collection agencies to recoup the cost of unpaid bills from patients. It is reported that last year alone, over €500,000 was spent in hiring debt collection agencies. Patients are telling some very upsetting stories about harassment, threats, and strong-arm tactics being employed. They talk about being frightened. They are mainly vulnerable people who are recovering from illness or surgery and the reported behaviour of these agencies is completely and utterly unacceptable. No hospital should be engaging debt collection agencies to pursue in this manner vulnerable patients, many of whom might be in some financial distress. Will the Minister for Health come before the Dáil to make a statement on this issue? I believe it would be merited as this is a serious matter. Will the Minister join me in demanding that hospitals desist from the practice of using debt collection agencies to harass patients?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-09-24	---	1	"We were all deeply impacted on by the determination and passion of the thousands of young people who took to the streets of Ireland on Friday to demand action on climate change. When it comes to the greatest threat facing our planet, young people are leading from the front. Their message is very clear, easily understood and makes sense. They are five words that will make a difference if listened to by those in power and the Government, namely, ""system change, not climate change"". They have asked for action to bring the urgency and radical policies the climate crisis deserves. Unfortunately, the Taoiseach has not heard them. They did not ask the Government to tinker at the edges, for half measures or to pass the buck; however, that is precisely what Government's proposed increase in carbon tax is. An increase in carbon tax passes the buck to hard pressed low and middle income families who are already fighting to make ends meet, while wealthy corporations are given a pass. The increase will hit families who are paying the equivalent of a second mortgage in childcare fees, young workers whose incomes are soaked up by extortionate rents, those living in rural Ireland who must use their cars to get around and pensioners who struggle to meet the cost of heating their homes. It is tinkering because we know from international evidence that carbon taxes do not work. They do not reduce carbon emissions or change people's behaviour. It is a half measure because the Government's proposals miss the crucial point. It has done very little to enable people to transition to a low carbon lifestyle and offset the tax. It has failed to invest properly to provide viable alternatives in the areas of transport, fuel and heating. Everyone accepts that we must do more and that we must do better, but we must also agree that climate response policies must be just and fair and, more importantly, that they must work. I call on the Government to consider a workable alternative, to fund climate action through progressive taxation and then invest in and deliver world-class public transport, to invest in renewable energy infrastructure and retrofitting housing stock. These are the measure that should be undertaken. The young people who protested last Friday want genuine investment in climate action. A carbon tax increase will not deliver on that demand and it is unforgivable to pretend otherwise. Will the Minster use the budget to map out a real climate action investment plan for which he will put up the cash and indicate that it will not include an increase in carbon tax?The Minister is correct to point out that Sinn Féin has consistently been against regressive forms of taxation that hit people on lower incomes. As it happens, I have two climate strikers in my home. I say to all of the strikers what I have said to them, namely, that tokenism will not cut it.We will not indulge in it as a political movement. I say the same thing to the strikers that I have said to my own two climate strikers, namely, that we will not let the Government get away with it either. We have had a carbon tax here for ten years and emissions have risen massively. That is the fact of the matter. Those who commend carbon tax do so only in the context of alternatives available to citizens to trigger the behavioural change needed. The Minister knows this, but he is taking the lazy approach. The easy and lazy thing to do is to have a go at Sinn Féin or anybody on the left who understands climate justice and a just transition have to be about more than passing the buck and punishing people who are poorer in society. It has to be about systemic change, but it seems that the Minister does not have the belly for this. I asked him to drop his hike in carbon tax in favour of investment in a real and radical plan that would make a difference and reduce emissions. Is he prepared to do this in the budget?That is not true.We will do so."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-09-17	---	1	The farmers who continue to protest and picket outside meat processing factories are fighting for their livelihoods and for the future of the family farm. The Taoiseach's words will offer them little hope and comfort. In the midst of the figures that he rattled off, he did not mention, even though he should have, that many beef farmers made less than €10,000 per year. Despite doing most of the work, farmers only receive approximately 20% of the sale price of beef. As the Taoiseach set out, the current price for a kilo of beef is €3.45. That is below the break-even point. Brexit looms, and the reality is that beef farmers are struggling for their very survival. That is why there are pickets on the gate. Many see this campaign as their last stand before their livelihoods are gone forever.This crisis did not come out of the blue. It has been taking shape for decades. This dispute is the direct result of corporate greed and the inequalities that have long existed in the market. Farmers are price takers, not price makers. Prices are decided by a very small and powerful group of people, which is something that does not feel, look or smell right. Fairness and fair play do not exist in this market or in the experience of beef farmers. As a result, the industry is on the brink.While the livelihood of beef farmers is being ruined, thousands of factory workers have been laid off. Only this morning, we heard of 350 temporary lay-offs at a plant in Cahir, County Tipperary.Much like the struggling farmers, these workers have bills to pay and children to feed and the loss of their pay cheques is absolutely devastating. Farmers do not want to be on the picket line, they want to be farming. Factory workers want to be back at work, earning a living. However, that is not going to happen unless the principle of fair play is brought to bear.I acknowledge that the two rounds of talks so far have delivered some progress regarding bonus payments and a grid review. However, the core issue of the base price being offered to farmers remains. There is a solution in that regard. The way to bring this dispute to an end is for the highly profitable meat factories to agree a base price increase with farmers. It seems clear that the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Deputy Creed, must convene a new round of talks at which farming organisations and processors can discuss this increase in base price. It is also clear that supports must be offered to the workers who have been laid off. Does the Taoiseach agree that meat processors should sit down again with farmers and agree an increased base price? Will the Minister convene a new round of talks to facilitate such a negotiation and agreement?It is more than that.That is a very disappointing response. It matters not a whit whether Deputy Micheál Martin, the Taoiseach or anyone else in the House endorses this agreement if it is not sellable and does not work for the farmers who are out on the picket lines. That is what matters. I am disappointed that the Taoiseach would try to use this issue to provoke a party-political fracas. It is not appropriate. Some 6,000 workers have been temporarily laid off and they want to get back to work.The Taoiseach described all that has been achieved in the negotiations to date. I acknowledged that progress has been made in my initial remarks. However, the issue of the base price has not been addressed. There is no point in telling farmers that they can act collectively and, at some point in the future, achieve a price increase. They need it now. I was on a picket line in County Cavan with farmers who told me that this is either sorted now or they will not be in business next year. Pushing this issue down the pipe is not going to work.It is unedifying for the Taoiseach to issue a threat to farmers to the effect that they must go with this agreement or get nothing. That is not the way to resolve this matter and, with all due respect to the Minister, neither is posting an open letter on Facebook. We need a new round of talks.We need rationality, common sense, goodwill and respect for farmers and workers. All of this can be done but it will only be done through a new round of talks.There will not be any.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-07-10	---	1	As we meet here this afternoon, farmers are at the gates protesting against the trade deal agreed between the European Union and Mercosur countries just over a week ago. All of the main farming organisations across the island are utterly opposed to the deal and for very good reason. The Mercosur deal represents a sell-out of Irish farmers and their families. It is devastating news for the rural economy and flies in the face of commitments made to tackle climate change.Irish beef is the best in the world and let there be no doubt about this. Through no fault of their own, farmers and their families are under massive pressure. There has been a sustained decline in beef prices over the last number of years and farmers are being fleeced by factories that do not pay a fair price for their cattle. Farmers are already suffering because of Brexit and any prospect of a hard or chaotic Brexit will be utterly devastating for the sector. In the middle of all of this, at a time when farm incomes are at disastrously low levels, the European Commission seeks to plough ahead with a deal that would cripple Irish agriculture by allowing tens of thousands of tonnes of cheap meat into the European Union and Ireland. All of this makes absolutely no sense. In fact, it is an insult to farmers, their families and everyone who relies on the beef industry in particular to make a living.It also makes no sense from an environmental perspective. In fact, I would say it makes a mockery of the European Union's concerns surrounding climate change. We all know the Amazon is being destroyed on a daily basis because of illegal logging and to make way for new cattle ranches. This policy is supported by the new president of Brazil and undoubtedly it will continue and be accelerated if the deal is approved. The Dáil recently declared a climate emergency and the Government recently launched its climate action plan. This deal and the Government's support for it renders both of these initiatives utterly meaningless. The deal needs to be stopped. That is what we need to do. To this end, Sinn Féin has a motion coming before the Dáil this afternoon that calls on the Government in no uncertain terms to stand up for Irish interests and to oppose the deal. The motion can be the first meaningful step in defeating what is a bad deal for our farmers, our environment and our country. I ask the Taoiseach to do the right thing and support the motion this afternoon when it comes before the House.The Taoiseach will not convince any sensible person, and certainly not any farmer, that he is protecting his or her interests in any shape, make or form by allowing our market to be flooded with South American beef. It makes no sense. Nobody believes the Taoiseach when he gives us this line that he is conscious of the needs of the rural economy and farming families, when out of the other side of his mouth he states the deal needs to be assessed and tested. It sounds like he is quite prepared to throw farming families under the bus if it suits the interests of bigger corporate interests who might wish to export into the large South American market. That is how it sounds to me and how it sounds to the farmers at the gate. What they need to hear from the Taoiseach is an unequivocal commitment to protect their livelihoods. What consumers need to hear from the Taoiseach is an unequivocal commitment to protect standards and the quality of the meat that is consumed here. We produce the best beef in the world. Why in the name of God would we open up our market to substandard produce?Beef from South America does not comply with the same food standards or traceability requirements. The Taoiseach knows that. The President of Brazil has as much interest in the Paris Agreement or environmental standards as the man in the moon. The Amazon rainforest is known as the lungs of the world. The Government is proposing to puncture the lungs of the world to allow cheap beef imports into the Irish market. That is unforgivable. If the Taoiseach and his Government care about farmers then they should support our motion. That will be the real test and the real yardstick of his rhetoric.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-07-10	---	2	I can only assume Fianna Fáil proposes to support Sinn Féin's motion later this afternoon to stop the deal.I am very glad to hear it, given that the mandate for the deal emanated from Fianna Fáil 20 years ago.I want to ask the Taoiseach about Brexit. The Tánaiste has described a hard Brexit as an ugly outcome and he is right. We are all very well aware of the potential catastrophe that could visit our island in such a scenario. We all agree that we cannot countenance an economic border on the island, that there can be no hardening of the Border and that the Good Friday Agreement must be protected, with our progress and peace. Therefore, I am very troubled to hear that the Tánaiste would even countenance the idea of checks on goods from the North to the South as it would fly in the face of our collective objectives. I put the following direct question to the Taoiseach and would appreciate a very direct answer. In the event that there is a crash, with no withdrawal agreement and no backstop, how will the Government ensure there is no economic border, no damage to the Good Friday Agreement and no damage to the progress we have made in the past 20 years?A Leas-Cheann Comhairle, that was not an answer but a studied evasion.I asked how, in the event that there is a crash, the Government would attain the shared objectives of there being no economic border, no hard border and no damage to the Good Friday Agreement, but we heard no straight answer.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-07-09	---	1	"In recent days there has been considerable controversy surrounding the recent decision of the Naval Service to dock two vessels because of the continuing recruitment and retention crisis in the Defence Forces. As the Taoiseach knows, the officer in command of the Naval Service, Commodore Michael Malone, wrote in a Defence Forces newsletter on 27 June that 540 personnel had left the service in the past five years and that because of an inadequate number of personnel, he had taken the decision to place two ships in an operational reserve capacity.In response to that information making its way into the public domain last weekend, the Minister of State with responsibility for defence, Deputy Paul Kehoe, dismissed it, as he has consistently dismissed concerns about the recruitment and retention crisis in the Defence Forces when these matters have been raised. On Saturday evening he claimed the two ships were being docked because of what he called ""planned maintenance"" and crews were being redeployed to other vessels. He directly contradicted the concerns of Commodore Malone. The Taoiseach yesterday accepted that the Naval Service faces significant staffing challenges and said it was ""cutting its cloth to measure"". He agreed with Commodore Malone and contradicted the Minister of State.Does the Taoiseach think it appropriate for the Minister of State to withdraw his remarks given that he was wrong and his assertion was inaccurate? I believe that should happen today. The docking of two naval vessels will have consequences and a number of military sources in the press this morning spelt out precisely what will be those challenges. A source indicated that because of Ireland's massive sea area, having nine vessels is like having two Garda cars patrolling the island of Ireland, so with the vessels docked, it is like having one and a half such patrol cars. Another source said that this is like having a ""neon sign for drug smugglers"" because the deterrent factor is gone, with the end result being more drugs on the streets in Dublin, Portarlington, Ballina and so on.That is the potential outworking of this issue. Fewer naval patrols in Irish waters because two vessels are docked means there will be fewer drug seizures and less of a deterrent. That cannot continue, so it is time for serious action to tackle what is a serious recruitment and retention crisis facing the Naval Service and the Defence Forces more generally. It is clear the recent recommendations of the Public Service Pay Commission are wholly inadequate. The Naval Service is operating at 88% of capacity and personnel numbers across the board have dropped below 8,500, despite a commitment to maintain numbers at 9,500. Morale is on the floor; 1,000 people left last year and 92 left in the past month alone. This is a very real crisis so what will the Taoiseach as Minister for Defence do about all of this? When will he ask the Minister of State to withdraw his inaccurate comments from the public record?Why then did the Minister of State, Deputy Kehoe, contradict Commodore Michael Malone? There have been expressions from very senior levels within the Defence Forces describing the relationship between them and the Department of Defence as toxic, broken and dysfunctional. That is not a sustainable situation. The Minister of State then came out and openly contradicted the commodore and attempted to place inaccurate and misleading information on the record. Does the Taoiseach not agree that the Minister of State should clarify or withdraw those remarks?It was reported in March this year that the rate of turnover in the Defence Forces was 8.1%. That figure now stands at 9%. For the purposes of comparison, the Ministry of Defence in Britain declared a retention crisis at a turnover rate of just 5%. We are clearly dealing with a real problem of scale while the Taoiseach sits on his hands. His pay increase proposals for very low-paid workers in the Defence Forces will simply not cut it. I suggest that he is making a bad situation a whole lot worse.Will the Taoiseach ask his Minister of State to withdraw his contradictions and inaccurate claims from the public domain?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-07-03	---	1	"The living wage technical group published its assessment of the living wage for 2019 this morning and its report makes for a sobering read. They have found that the living wage - the rate of pay that a full-time worker requires in order to enjoy a socially acceptable standard of living, in other words, an income floor of such a level as to allow him or her not to live the high life but, rather, a decent one - has risen to €12.30 an hour. The increase is of the magnitude of 40 cent per hour and is largely accounted for by increases in the cost of living in particular and in the cost of housing and, more especially, because of runaway rental costs. The Taoiseach will be aware that the living wage - now set at €12.30 - is considerably more than the minimum wage in this State which stands at €9.80 an hour. The gap between the two is sizeable. Workers deserve to be treated fairly and paid fairly for their work. People who are at work have every right to expect that they can have a decent standard of living. As a result, it is not acceptable that tens of thousands of workers and their families endure poverty, uncertainty, stress and substandard living conditions as a result of low pay. We are not talking about a small number of people. According to the most recent figures from the Central Statistics Office, CSO, 140,000 individuals are in receipt of the minimum wage. The majority of those 140,000 are women, and the vast majority of them work in the services sector.There is also another big group of people who earn just above the minimum wage. Their income lies between the minimum wage and what the living wage ought to be. All of these are hardworking people. They are childcare workers, members of the Defence Forces, hospitality workers and shop assistants. They are people with whom we interact and on whom we rely on a daily basis. The situation of poverty at work in which they find themselves is simply not acceptable. We need to start moving to ensure that all workers in the public and private sectors are paid the living wage.The State should lead from the front on this matter and the Taoiseach should introduce the living wage for all civil and public servants. The latter has been a pre-budget proposal from Sinn Féin for many years. Last year, it would have cost just in excess of €35 million, as per costings provided to us by the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform. This is a minor and modest sum in the greater scheme of things, particularly when one considers the benefits that it would bring to workers and their families. Will the Taoiseach move to ensure that the State is a living wage employer in the next budget? When will the Government legislate for the living wage? When will it legislate and ensure that workers can enjoy a wage that will afford them a decent basic standard of living?We are well behind the curve. Often one hears tributes to and, on occasion, one sees people shed crocodile tears for low-paid workers.These workers do not need not soft words, honey-coated words or tributes, they need to earn at least the living wage.The Low Pay Commission should be looking at a living wage, not the minimum wage. The Taoiseach is wrong to state that those on the minimum wage are simply people who are working for pin money or to earn supplementary incomes. Almost half of those on the minimum wage are full-time workers. The minimum wage stands at €9.80 per hour. Everyone here, including the Taoiseach, earns multiples of that.At least the Taoiseach gave a straight answer. He said ""No"" and indicated that he is not interested in improving the living standards and the quality of life of low-paid workers. What is proposed here is not a ransom, it is not a fortune. It is €12.30 an hour. The State ought to lead by example. It should be a matter of shame that the State has in its employment public servants and some civil servants who work for less than that. Shame on the Government. No wonder he is dragging his heels in respect of the soldiers, those who work in the Naval Service and the Defence Forces. As the Taoiseach just acknowledged, he does not care and the answer is ""No"".Legislation for a living wage would make provision for the health and financial circumstances of business.Of course that is the case. The Taoiseach knows full well that the minimum wage has latitudes like that; of course the living wage would have to take account of the financial state of health of any enterprise. As a matter of public policy and basic standards, people at work should expect that they can live a basic, decent life and that work actually pays. I have a document here laying out Sinn Féin's position on the living wage. I am very happy to share it with the Taoiseach. I hope he will read it and, more importantly, act on it.It was ""No"".It is not. It is terrible.Sinn Féin will look after workers. How utterly counterproductive."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-07-03	---	2	Absolutely. There has to be order between the parties of Government.Ulster Bank's announcement of the sale of €900 million worth of loans to vulture funds, including 3,200 family homes with domestic mortgages, is unacceptable and morally bankrupt. The sale is only possible because the Government has given political cover and support to vulture funds. Fine Gael is as responsible for this sale as Ulster Bank. Thousands of Irish families face the potential sale of their loans to a vulture fund and they need and demand urgent action. The reality is that no loan in arrears or otherwise is safe under the current rules.Sinn Féin's No Consent, No Sale Bill, put forward by Deputy Pearse Doherty, is making its way through the Oireachtas. I believe this Bill is urgently needed as it would ensure that banks cannot sell on loans without the direct consent of the borrower. Given the urgency at hand, will the Taoiseach assure us and ensure that this Bill will progress quickly, that it is not subjected to delay and that it is not frustrated, because those families faced with this Ulster Bank sale and others require protection. I believe that is the least the Taoiseach could afford to those families. It is high time he sided with families as against siding with the vulture funds.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-07-03	---	3	Ar mo shon féin agus ar son Shinn Féin, ba mhaith liom comhbhrón a dhéanamh le clann agus le cairde an iarTheachta Mark Killilea, a fuair bás i Mí na Nollag. On my behalf and that of Sinn Féin, I wish to express sincere sympathies and condolences to the family and friends of former Teachta Mark Killilea who passed away last December.Bhí gairm fada ag an iarTheachta Killilea in oifig phoiblí agus táim cinnte de go bhfuil a mhuintir an-bhródúil as seo. As has been stated, Mark had a very long and, indeed, distinguished career in public office. I am sure his clan are extremely proud of that. He served as a member of Galway County Council, as a Member of the Dáil on behalf of the people of Galway, in the Seanad and, of course, at the European Parliament with great distinction. He also served as Minister of State at the Department of Posts and Telegraphs. It seems his record there is a matter of legend in the context of telephone connections in the early 1980s under the then Taoiseach, Charles Haughey, whom he, as a member of the so-called gang of five, backed during the Fianna Fáil leadership context in 1979, something which, I am sure, the Leas-Cheann Comhairle recalls. I will not elaborate on that, but I wish to recall, as others have, that he coined the famous phrase that the ordinary people of Ireland are those who eat their dinner in the middle of the day. If ever there was a political concept or phrase that will resonate down the generations, that for sure is it.I did not know Mark, but he was evidently extremely in tune with the people of his constituency and this country. His work ethic, ability and achievements have been attested to and I wish to join with others in extending condolences to his wife, Anne, his children Éidín, Niamh, Deirbrin, Niall, Donagh, Medbh and Eimhín, and the rest of his family and friends. We recall also his son, Mark, agus cuirimid fáilte freisin roimh baby Mark as the family lineage continues. I am sure that, for all of them, he was and always will be simply the best. We extend our sympathies to our colleagues on the Fianna Fáil benches and the Leas-Cheann Comhairle on the loss of a colleague and a friend. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam dílis.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-07-02	---	1	The Minister is making a very lame attempt to defend the indefensible, which is the Mercosur agreement. It should be remembered that Fianna Fáil agreed the mandate for negotiations for this deal back in 1999.The Minister will be aware that Sinn Féin has spent the past five years calling on the Minister and Fine Gael to withdraw support for this mandate. Now we have this deal-----I am sorry to offend by putting the facts of this matter on the record. Yet, here we find ourselves faced with this deal. The Taoiseach's position is that if it is good for Ireland, we will support it. That is the stated position of the Government. All of the main farming organisations and stakeholders across the island oppose the deal.They do not need any long-winded analysis or any fig leaf. They are well aware this is a bad deal, particularly in respect of beef, but also for the poultry and pigmeat sectors. Their criticisms are well-founded because tariff-free quotas amounting to 99,000 tonnes of beef, 180,000 tonnes of poultry and 25,000 tonnes of pigmeat are bad news for each of those sectors.They are bad news in and of themselves but, when combined with the sustained decline in beef prices over the last number of years, and also, as the Minister has acknowledged, the unfolding risk of Brexit, farming families across this island are quite right to call the Government out on this bad deal. It can be best summarised as a sell-out of Irish farmers and their families, and of rural Ireland as a whole. Commissioner Phil Hogan, the Government's man in Brussels, despite all this, describes this deal as fair and balanced - those are his words and they beggar belief. It also beggars belief that at a time when this Dáil has declared a climate emergency, and from a Government that has encouraged people not to eat beef, unless, it seems, it is Brazilian----------that the Government would be prepared to sign up to a deal with Brazil, whose President has committed to destroying the Amazon and the indigenous communities who live there, in order to increase the profits of a few millionaire beef exporters, and that the Government would move to make it easier for Brazilian and Argentinian beef to come into the European Union, and for German car manufacturers to flog high-emissions cars in South America. That makes a mockery of this and calls out the hypocrisy of the Government in terms of any commitment to climate action or climate justice.Will the Minister make himself abundantly clear on this deal? Has the Taoiseach made it clear to the European Commission that Ireland will oppose this deal? Has he indicated that the Irish State will vote against it? Will we have a binding vote in the Oireachtas on this deal? Will the Government afford to us the opportunity where it has failed to defend farming families, rural Ireland and our planet?The Minister is right to acknowledge that we have opposed this deal and negotiation from the get-go, from as far back as 1999 when Fianna Fáil agreed the mandate----------and, as I said, in the course of the last five years. We have urged Government to stand by farming families and rural Ireland and, also, to stand by that which is sustainable and sensible and things that protect our planet rather than underscoring wholesale vandalism in the destruction of the Amazon rainforest. It is laughable to hear the Minister try to explain away the destruction of the rainforest with verbiage around Paris commitments. The Paris commitments count for nothing insofar as the current Brazilian Administration is concerned, and well the Minister knows it.The Government is going into this agreement with its eyes wide open. It knows that for the beef sector in particular, but also the poultry and pigmeat sectors, this deal is really bad news. It knows that, coupled with Brexit and the fall in beef prices, it is potentially calamitous. The Government has to know, because it has to have some level of common sense, that it is not a good thing to import Brazilian beef instead of supporting the production, sale and consumption of Irish traceable beef in Ireland.That is a matter of common sense. I again call on the Minister-----He has hidden behind legal interpretations of the trade deal in terms of whether it is mixed or not. I have to insist that, as the elected representatives of the Irish people, we have our say on this matter.I have to insist that a Government----------that has failed Irish farming families and rural Ireland, at a minimum, allows us, the people's elected representatives in this House, the opportunity to defend their interests where it will not to do so.That is rubbish.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-06-26	---	1	The truth hurts. The truth and hurt this afternoon are that 10,000 support staff in the health service are on strike at 38 hospitals and facilities across the State. They are engaged in industrial action because of the failures of the Government. This is a mess entirely of its making and that truth, I hope, rings home at some level with the Taoiseach.I took the opportunity this morning to speak with workers at Beaumont, the Mater and the Rotunda hospitals. I spoke with them to extend the solidarity of Sinn Féin and the considerable public support they enjoy for their just cause. I hope this is the only morning I will have to do the rounds of hospitals, and that staff are forced onto the picket line.The strike has been a long time coming. The Taoiseach has known since 2015, when the job evaluation scheme was resumed and agreed, that there was a need to pay workers fairly and that this liability was going to arise at some stage, yet he made precisely no effort and no plan was put in place to pay the staff involved what they are due. The Taoiseach should know that none of the workers wants to be out on strike. The people to whom I spoke are healthcare assistants, maternity care assistants, porters, catering staff and chefs. They want to do what they do best; they want to be at work, caring for and supporting patients. They are upset and offended because they believe their work is being disrespected and that somehow the Government regards them as menial staff, carrying out menial and unimportant roles. It is important to say that the health service simply cannot function without these workers, and patients cannot be cared for in the way they must be.They feel they have been let down and believe that their work is undervalued. They are correct in that analysis. The job evaluation scheme also chimes with their analysis because it found that workers are being underpaid for the skills level they bring to their jobs and for the duties they carry out. Dr. Paud O'Regan, a consultant at South Tipperary General Hospital, said this morning that the industrial action is having a major and almost catastrophic effect on services. I can only imagine what the consequences will be for workers and patients if the Government drives this dispute to further industrial action next week. Despite the Taoiseach's effort to portray workers and their union as unreasonable, that is not the case. It should be borne in mind that the HSE accepted the finding of the job evaluation and requested the money necessary to pay these workers what they deserve but the Government has refused to live up to its side of the bargain. The Taoiseach has broken his word and now we have a messy and unnecessary strike.The workers trusted in the process but the Taoiseach has done nothing. He made a derisory, non-offer to the workers last week which was, of course, rejected and here we are. I ask the Taoiseach to act now, keep his word and end this messy and unnecessary industrial action by simply sticking to those things that he has agreed.The workers who are out on strike today do not believe that the Taoiseach fully appreciates or even acknowledges the important work they carry out. It might do him no harm to visit a picket line; it might not do him any harm at all to talk to people and hear what they have to say. If he did, they would tell him that they feel very let down. These are low-paid workers and caterers and porters can be contrasted with members of the Judiciary and the lot of judges in Irish society and the regard in which they are held. These workers are wounded by this and believe the Taoiseach has let them down.They have made clear that patients are still being cared for in our hospitals, as I am sure the Taoiseach knows, and that catering workers, healthcare assistants and others are making sure that is the case. Of course, this unnecessary dispute is having an effect on patients. If he really cares about patients and values the workers, the Taoiseach will move to resolve the dispute.There is no need for the Labour Court. This is a ball of smoke - an absolute diversion by the Taoiseach. It is utterly disingenuous. There is no matter of dispute here, save that the Government will not keep its word.The Government will not pay what is due to these workers on the back of a job evaluation scheme that was agreed between the parties.Let us not play games. The only thing the Taoiseach is doing by offering up the diversion of the Labour Court is prolonging the strike.The Taoiseach is prolonging a messy strike that is of his making because he has broken his word. For as long as he refuses to honour his agreements----------we will have industrial action. I appeal to the Taoiseach to be reasonable.I ask the Taoiseach to be responsible and act now to keep his word and end this dispute.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-06-26	---	2	Ar mo shon féin agus ar son Shinn Féin ba mhaith liom comhbhrón a dhéanamh le clann agus cairde an iar-Theachta, Jackie Healy-Rae a fuair bás i mí na Nollag 2014.On my own behalf and on behalf of Sinn Féin I extend our sincere sympathies to the family and friends of former Teachta Jackie Healy-Rae, who passed away in December 2014. As the Ceann Comhairle has already said, Jackie Healy-Rae was and will forever be remembered as one of the great characters of the House and Irish political life generally. His trademark wit, his plain speaking, his rich melodic Kerry accent and, of course, his flat cap, were all part of this character. While he was sometimes teased or lampooned he was undoubtedly one of the most astute and determined political operators ever to grace the Dáil. I am sure we can all agree on this. It is not only that he represented those who eat their dinner in the middle of the day, he had their backing as well. There is no doubt the people of south Kerry always had Jackie's back and I imagine in the end for him that is all that really mattered.In a political career spanning 40 years he served three terms from 1997 to 2011. He served 30 years as a member of Kerry County Council, including two stints as mayor of Kerry. As has been said, he never lost an election. That is some record and it is one of which very many of us gathered here are extremely envious. His record of service to the people of Kerry has been continued with the election of not one but two of his sons, our colleagues Michael and Danny, who were elected in 2011 and 2016 respectively. That his grandchildren Maura, Johnny and Jackie Junior now serve on Kerry County Council is further testament to Jackie's legacy and to the political achievements of this political family, the Healy-Raes.It may be five years on but I have no doubt that the sting of the loss of Jackie is still felt by his beloved family. I extend our sympathies to that family, to his partner Kathleen, to our colleagues Michael and Danny, to his other sons John and Denis, to his daughters Joan and Rosemary, to all of his grandchildren and to all of his other friends and relatives throughout the kingdom and beyond. He may be gone but he will never ever be forgotten. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam dílis.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-06-20	---	1	Hear, hear.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-06-19	---	1	This dispute is scheduled to take place tomorrow, when 10,000 workers who are absolutely essential to the functioning of our health services will take to the picket line. These are low-paid workers such as chefs and healthcare assistants. This strike will happen because the Government has broken its word.The Taoiseach knows, as the workers know, that back in 2015 there was an agreement to reintroduce job evaluations. The reason was that there was a recognition that low-paid workers had taken on additional tasks and responsibilities and that due to austerity, the financial collapse and the policies of many assembled here, the workers were not receiving the correct levels of pay. The Taoiseach agreed to this job evaluation scheme in 2015 but of course he welshed on that and dragged his heels. Eventually, in 2017 a job evaluation scheme was initiated to avoid strike action at that time. When the exercise was carried out, it found in phases 1 and 2 that more than 6,000 workers were being underpaid. Low-paid workers are being substantially underpaid, by between €1,500 and €3,000 per year, which is a lot of money when one is on a low wage. The curious part of it is that the HSE accepted the validity and necessity of the evaluation process and its outcome. It then asked for this shortfall to be funded. As the Taoiseach knows, the cost would amount to some €16.2 million, which is a drop in the ocean and minuscule when compared with the waste and overspend his Administration has stood over.The Taoiseach says he does not want the strike to happen. It strikes me that he does want it to happen because the basis of the strike action is his failure to honour and keep his word. There is no need for a Labour Court intervention and there is no need for the Workplace Relations Commission. What is required is a political decision and a political acknowledgement that these workers hold our health system together and a recognition that they are not being paid what they are due. It requires the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, to ensure that the moneys required to give these workers what they are entitled to is released. Sin é; that is it. That is the beginning, the middle and the end of it. If the Taoiseach really does not want this strike to happen, he should make sure that the word of the Government is kept and the request by the HSE for these moneys is met.We will always insist that the health service is fully and properly resourced but we will always call the Government out, not on its spending but on its waste of public moneys and its wilful disregard for the public purse. Everybody has seen that, in particular in the case of the children's hospital.What is required here is not an intervention by the Labour Court or any other third party but for the Taoiseach to keep his word. That is what he has failed to do. We heard this line before about nursing staff and midwives and now we hear it about chefs and healthcare assistants. The Taoiseach waxes lyrical about their contribution to the system but he is not prepared to pay them. As Head of Government, he is not prepared to ensure that, for example, a grade 2 chef whose entry level pay is €24,000, which is hardly a fortune, and similar workers are fairly paid. The Taoiseach accepted the need for job evaluation, signed on the dotted line for it and now he is not prepared to honour the outcome of that process. That is the reality of this dispute and that is why there will be strike action tomorrow. The only way to avert that is not to reach for a third party but for the Taoiseach to keep his word and respect these low-paid workers.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-06-19	---	2	We have all known for some time that access to vile and violent material, including that of a pornographic nature, on the Internet and through social media is deeply troubling and has real life consequences. When there is a high-profile case such as that which we have seen, it crystallises everybody's attention on the issue. The Taoiseach has made a commitment to establish an office of a digital safety commissioner. That is to be welcomed and it is essential that it happen. I remind him that Sinn Féin moved a Bill on this matter which passed Second Stage and which went to committee in early 2018. Therefore, there is a legislative basis to move on. I do not think the Government or anybody else should be precious about who initiates legislation to make the changes that we know need to happen. I ask the Taoiseach to consider the Bill to which I refer as an avenue to move forward and get something on the Statute Book expeditiously.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-06-18	---	1	We will try. I want to raise the case of Majella Moynihan. I am sure all of us, listening as Majella told her devastating story, have been moved and deeply saddened by her experiences. For those of us who were children in the 1980s, I think this transported us back to that Ireland - that awful, oppressive, misogynistic Ireland. Majella told her story. She told of her background as a child, her experience of growing up in an industrial school and then, in 1983, how she landed her dream job, and the pride she felt, walking through the gates of Templemore to become a member of An Garda Síochána. By all accounts, she was an effective garda. She was described as honest, dependable and willing. Of course, she was not to have a successful career in An Garda Síochána because she was in a relationship and she became pregnant. For that transgression, she was vilified, isolated and damaged in the most fundamental ways. On 31 May 1984, Majella gave birth to her son at University Hospital Galway. She says that when she left the hospital, she did so in a trance. Heartbreakingly, she describes the situation whereby her child was taken away from her and she was coerced into allowing the child to be put up for adoption. She describes that as the worst day of her life. Then, she was subjected to an internal Garda investigation. She was lucky she was not sacked, because of the intervention of the Archbishop, but she was brought to heel and disciplined for the transgression of being pregnant and having a child outside of wedlock. She was then brought to an internal inquiry at which the behaviour of the father of her child, also a garda, was investigated.All of these things happened and Majella has now stepped forward to tell her story. The Garda Commissioner and the Minister for Justice and Equality have apologised, quite correctly, to her in recent days. She is due to meet the Garda Commissioner, Drew Harris, and, I understand, the Minister for Justice and Equality in the coming days. I want to ask the Taoiseach is it now time for him to apologise to Majella on behalf of the State. Since she came forward, others have followed suit in order to tell their stories. Anne Cleary, a retired garda who was based in Fitzgibbon Street station in the 1980s, has said that the top brass were very influenced by the church’s teachings.Who was not in those times? She tells of one girl who kept her baby and another who gave up her child for adoption.She tells of how these had traumatic effects on people's lives. She describes a culture of fear. Are there more Majellas out there? What will the Taoiseach do to establish the full facts? Majella said yesterday that she spoke with Deputy Michael Noonan who was Minister for Justice in 1983, but she spoke to him ten years ago and at that point he said to her that this was an internal Garda matter.The mind boggles as to how this could ever have been an internal Garda matter. I understand that Deputy Michael Noonan has not responded to this matter. Should he now make a statement and has the Taoiseach spoken with him on the issue?I agree with the Taoiseach that the next steps must in the first instance be dictated by Majella but I also think that the State has an obligation, retrospectively, to ensure, for example, that she is awarded her full pension. There is an obligation on the State not to speculate that there may well be other Majellas but to establish the full facts of the matter. It seems anecdotally that this was not an isolated case. There is an obligation to investigate if it is true, or not, that there were more Majellas and, if so, how many?It is important that the serving Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Flanagan, having rightly echoed an apology to Majella, should establish that we are now living in a new time. The then serving Minister for Justice in 1983, Deputy Michael Noonan, as recently as ten years ago described this as an internal Garda matter. It is very important that that matter is clarified. I would imagine that Deputy Noonan would welcome the opportunity to clarify this matter.The Taoiseach is right that those of us who grew up in the 1980s recognise this atmosphere and ideology as set out through Majella's story. It is important in the here and now that we give absolute assurances, and that it is made absolutely clear, that we in fact live in a different Ireland. On that basis, the former Minister for Justice, Deputy Michael Noonan, should make a statement and should clarify this matter.Nobody is criticising them.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-06-18	---	2	Táim fíor-bhuíoch as an deis labhartha ar an mBille tábhachtach seo agus iaraim tacaíocht ó gach aon Teachta dó.If passed, as I hope it will be, the Bill will represent an important step forward in strengthening workers’ rights, particularly for those in the hospitality sector, who are often on low pay and who suffer disproportionate levels of exploitation in the workplace. The Bill will ensure that workers' tips will be given legal protection by making it illegal for an employer to withhold or deduct staff tips and will require businesses to display their tipping policy in order that customers will know how tips are distributed. No reasonable person could disagree with either of these clauses. They are positive measures and the Bill has rightly received tremendous support from the trade union movement, not least through ICTU, as well as from the OneGalway and OneCork organisations. They recognise the importance of the Bill, as I hope every Teachta Dála will when the vote is taken.If we leave a tip in a restaurant, bar or café, we all reasonably and rightly expect that the person who served us or who prepared our food or drink will receive the tip, or at least a cut of it, but that is not always the case. Most people are surprised and angry to learn that workers do not have a legal right to their tips, which is a problem. Research conducted in 2017 highlights that one third of employees' tips are regularly stolen or dipped into by their employers. Nobody can stand over that or allow such practices to continue. Workers deserve their dues, fair treatment, their wages and their tips. That is the way it has to be. In that regard, the Bill is unashamedly pro-worker but I emphasise that it is not anti-employer in any way. There are not two competing, mutually exclusive demands. No good employer has anything to fear from the Bill and, in fact, many employers have welcomed it because it will remove from employers the responsibility and burden for the administration of employees’ tips and put workers in control of the tronc scheme. That is welcome and will bring transparency to the system in workplaces. There is no downside to the Bill unless one happens to be a bad employer. There are some of them around but those who breach the provisions of the legislation rightly deserve to face the sanctions outlined in the Bill. For the vast majority of employers, however, and for employees alike, the Bill is good news and should be made law.Iarraim ar gach Teachta tacú leis an mBille atá romhainn. Let us get the Bill passed and enacted. Let us do the right thing.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-06-11	---	1	"I congratulate Deputies Clare Daly, Wallace, Fitzgerald and Kelleher on their election to the European Parliament.This is national carer's week. It is a week in which we acknowledge and recognise the tens of thousands of carers throughout the State for the contribution that they make to people's lives, to families and to communities. We can safely say that they are everyday heroes without whom many people would not enjoy a decent or normal life. We can all agree that they are to be commended on their efforts and work.Therefore, it is with much regret to learn as we did recently that the HSE has effectively suspended the allocation of home help hours to new applicants. It has applied this suspension at a time when more than 6,000 people are waiting for access to home care supports. The Taoiseach knows as well as I do the impact this will have on older people, people in need of care and people with disabilities and their carers, as well as their wider communities. The Taoiseach also knows it will place further pressure on hospitals by compounding the problem of delayed discharges.The HSE says it has taken this action to balance the budget for 2019 but curtailing home help hours is a false economy. Directly employed home help, in particular, represents exceptional value for money. It allows older people to remain in their homes or to be safely discharged from hospital. If patients do not have enough home help hours, they are forced to remain in hospital at a substantial cost to the HSE or their families are forced to pay privately for home care support. Neither of these options represents value for money. Both of them end up costing more in the long run. We consistently hear from patients in hospitals who cannot be discharged because of a lack of home care supports. There are people who want to go home, and who could and should be going home, but adequate supports are not in place. Despite a budget increase of €10 million for this year, the number of hours being provided is simply not enough. I could say ""we told you so"" because Sinn Féin warned that the allocation would be inadequate. We argued for an extra allocation of €40 million in respect of home care packages to make adequate provision, but the Government chose not to listen. I would like the Taoiseach to commit to looking at whether funding can be found in the HSE budget to fund additional home help hours that can ease budgetary pressures elsewhere. I ask him to do that quickly because it would be money very well spent and it would save the HSE money in the long run. At a time when there is rightly a focus on budgetary practices, we need to focus on things that work and on real and prudent public spending.The Taoiseach has not addressed the central point of my question. It has been confirmed by the HSE that between now and early November, there will be a reduction or a restriction on the number of new or additional hours allocated. As I said in the course of my question, this comes at a time when more than 6,000 people are on a waiting list for home care supports.Very often, as the Taoiseach knows, those will be the only supports afforded to carers. I asked the Taoiseach a simple question and he recited what he regards as his record of support for carers. Carers, of course, will dispute many aspects of that but I am asking him about this particular issue. Will he go back to the HSE management and tell them that it is not acceptable to say to people who are waiting for home help hours that they may not receive any assistance until November? That is months away and anybody who cares for an older person or a person with a disability will tell the Taoiseach that it is not sustainable to ask them to wait for months on end for additional supports. The HSE said it is taking this action because of budgetary pressures but this is a classic case of penny wise and pound foolish.A cut of this nature runs against the grain of Sláintecare and the stated intention to keep people in the community. It runs against the ambition of dealing with delayed discharges and overcrowding in our hospitals. It makes eminent sense for the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, to go back to HSE management and tell them that the money has to be found and that 6,000 people or more cannot be left in the lurch, particularly now, during national carer's week.I ask the Taoiseach to make a commitment to the people he has commended so warmly that he will go back to the HSE and that the money will be found for home help hours."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-05-28	---	1	"Speaking on ""Morning Ireland"" earlier, the former head of the Army Ranger Wing, Commandant Cathal Berry, stated that the Defence Forces are being dismantled and demoralised as a result of Government policy. The facts bear that out. There is, in the Defence Forces, as in other areas of the public service, a recruitment and retention crisis. The number of serving personnel has dropped below 8,500 despite a commitment to maintain numbers at 9,500. Morale is on the floor. We are in a situation where members see a long-term career in the Defence Forces as unsustainable and unviable if they are to provide for their families. As a result, they are choosing to leave. This is down to the simple fact that Defence Forces personnel are the worst-paid members of the public service. Many Defence Forces families are reliant on the working family payment. The fact that many families cannot make ends meet has been highlighted here and elsewhere on countless occasions. Some, as the Minister is aware, resort to sleeping in their cars as a way to save on petrol. Others rely on the Society of St. Vincent de Paul. The Taoiseach stated in January that joining the Defence Forces is about more than just money. I agree with him in that regard because being a member of the Defence Forces is not a cushy number. The work involved is hard and can be dangerous. Those joining the Army, the Naval Service and the Air Corps are motivated primarily by a desire to serve. All of us appreciate that. However, people do not join the Defence Forces to be disrespected or marginalised. Pride does not put bread on the table. This situation has been allowed to run on without any resolution. The reasons for this are obvious. Members of the Defence Forces have been consistently sidelined in public service pay negotiations.They are excluded from trade union membership or affiliation with ICTU, and they are legally prevented from protesting their terms and conditions of employment. No other worker in the State gets as raw a deal. It is time for the Minister to listen to their concerns and the concerns of their families, as well as to the concerns of former personnel.Will the Minister recognise that serious damage has been done to the reputation of the Defence Forces as a career option? Will she listen to what Commandant Berry has said, and what hundreds of other former personnel have to say? Will she listen to soldiers and their families, who have said that enough is enough?Cathal Berry was quite damning; he said that there is a sense of absolute betrayal and that it is palpable and visceral. He added that he has not seen anything even remotely like this in his 23 years of service. The Minister has described a process of pay restoration. She seems to take the view that the Defence Forces personnel are getting a fair and sustainable deal, when all of the evidence is to the contrary. I am sure the Minister has met Defence Forces personnel and their families, because they have been extremely vocal. They feel they have no option but to speak out. They are not getting by.When will the Public Service Pay Commission report be published? Can the Minister give us an assurance that when it is published, there will be substantial progress and substantial benefit for members of the Defence Forces and their families? Anything short of that or any approach by Government that is merely concerned with going through the motions will mean that personnel will continue to leave and that these families will continue to struggle.Sinn Féin has tabled an amendment to the Industrial Relations (Amendment) Bill 2018, which is due to be discussed tomorrow. It recognises that members of the Defence Forces are employees and are entitled to the same protections as every other worker in the State. Will the Minister support that amendment?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-05-22	---	1	"Over the past number of weeks, the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, has championed the concept of co-living as a solution to the rental crisis. He has gone so far as to say that people should be excited by his co-living plan. One example of this exciting plan is being developed in Dún Laoghaire by Bartra Capital Property Group, and involves 208 studio dwellings that are around the same size as a parking space. It is proposed that on one floor 42 people would share one kitchen and for this exciting proposal, as the Minister puts it, rent would be in excess of €1,300 per month for what amounts to tenement living.I am not sure about the Taoiseach, but I do not find that proposal exciting in the slightest. Given the public reaction to the Minister's new project, people in the real world do not find it exciting either; in fact, they have been angered by it. The Minister is so out of touch that he cannot seem to grasp that co-living is not an answer to the housing or rental crises. It is an insult to those seeking a safe and secure roof over their heads. Threshold has described these proposed developments as ""21st century bedsits with a glossy makeover"", and further said that they should not be viewed as a viable solution to the housing shortage. I agree with that assessment, because co-living has no place in our dysfunctional rental market. It is certainly not a solution.It is, however, the clearest evidence of the biggest obstacle to tackling the housing crisis and that is the Taoiseach's Government. The most serious issue here is that the Minister thinks this is a good idea. Not only does he support and champion it, he doubles down on his message, and is saying to young people, in effect, that a box room with a fold-up bed and a kitchen shared by 42 people for €1,300 a month is as good as it gets. It is absolutely off the wall and it seems the reality of the Government's plan is bed and breakfasts and hotels for homeless children, two and three generations of families under one roof, ridiculous runaway rents, council housing waiting lists that will never be cleared, and the dream of one day owning their own home being totally shattered for many young people. This is as good as it gets on the Taoiseach's watch. Co-living and a perpetual rental crisis are all the Minister has to offer tens of thousands of people affected by the housing crisis. That is his record, his promise and his mantra. How does the Taoiseach defend this?I am simply reiterating the words of the Taoiseach's own Minister, who regards this co-living concept as ""exciting"". As a Minister he has championed it and recommends it as an exciting prospect. I think he is targeting this bizarre message at young professionals in particular. This is just a glamorised form of tenement living, with a boxroom no larger than the size of a parking space, a fold-down bed and shared common areas and kitchen facilities for €1,300 per month. If this is what the Minister regards as exciting and something to be embraced by the young people of Ireland, then we do not have to deliberate very much to understand what the problem is in terms of resolving the housing and rental crises. The Government and the Minister are so out of touch that they regard an insult such as this proposition as an exciting offer for young people. The Taoiseach has, no doubt, been around the country like the rest of us talking to people and canvassing for political support. He can be in no doubt that there is no support for this proposition. He can be in no doubt that there is a widespread consensus that his plans for tackling the housing crisis have manifestly failed.The Taoiseach and his Minister, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, have been found out. This cock-and-bull story around co-living simply amplifies the scale of their failure.So says the Taoiseach, having just launched a personal attack."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-05-22	---	2	The programme for Government commits to providing adequate resources to reduce hospital waiting lists. This week, a woman needing hospital treatment received a letter telling her that she had been put on a waiting list of in excess of 175 weeks for an appointment at the Midland Regional Hospital, Mullingar. That is more than three years. This woman is ill and potentially suffering from a serious blood disorder, yet she is being left with no notion of when or if she will be called for an appointment. She will face this uncertainty for anything up to three years. She is not alone, as more than 500,000 people are facing the same uncertainty on waiting lists. It is nothing short of outrageous. It should be said that Midland Regional Hospital, Mullingar, is the same hospital that only last month had to issue a full capacity protocol due to dangerous levels of overcrowding. Now, this woman, who is just one of many, is being told that she may have to wait for up to three years for her appointment.Does the Taoiseach accept that the Government has failed to deal with waiting lists at hospitals----------a crisis in which more than 500,000 people have been left waiting?To Belfast.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-05-15	---	1	"Go raibh maith agat.Things are tetchy between the partners in government today. Yesterday it was announced that the European Commission, under the stewardship of the Commissioner for Competition, Margrethe Vestager, is to undertake a formal antitrust investigation into Insurance Ireland's data pooling system. I welcome that announcement. It is a decision which will be welcomed by motorists across the State who are being crippled by the increased cost of insurance. However, this is not only an issue which affects motorists. Rising insurance costs impact on people from all walks of life, on business, on farmers, on marts, and on community festivals up and down the country.Very serious allegations are being levelled at the insurance industry here: that it operates a cartel to the detriment of new entrants to the market and ultimately to customers who are being fleeced. It beggars belief that it has taken the European Commission to step in here when it is clear that insurers have been ripping off policyholders for years and the Government has consistently refused to act on serious issues that have been raised.In 2016, on the initiative of my colleague, Deputy Pearse Doherty, the Joint Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach produced a report on the rising cost of motor insurance. Its first recommendation was ""an end to any sort of “closed shop” mentality prevailing among existing insurers in the market – full access to data must be made available to all new entrants."" Since then, Insurance Ireland has continued to operate as normal and has brazenly opposed sensible attempts to bring greater transparency to the insurance industry. The Government must now regard insurers and their assertions in a manner that takes account of the very serious allegations that are levelled against them. That is why in addition to what I hope is a very speedy result to this investigation we see major reforms of how insurers do their business and treat their customers. We need to see a commitment to bring down prices as changes to awards are brought in and crucially we need new legislation to put manners on the insurance industry.Sinn Féin has a Bill, the Consumer Insurance Contracts Bill, which passed Second Stage in the Dáil unanimously, and was supported by the Government, to reform and modernise the law in respect of insurance contracts. Since that passed Second Stage, the Government has stymied the Bill's progress and has blocked it from going any further. It has dragged its heels on this issue for far too long. It is clear that the Government's kid gloves approach towards the insurance industry has failed and that it must end.Will the Taoiseach give a commitment that the Government will allow the Bill to progress? Will it ensure that it is passed to bring the insurance industry to heel and that it will act decisively in the interest of policyholders and consumers?The Taoiseach has confirmed what we all know, namely, that insurance premiums having skyrocketed by 70% between the years 2013 and 2016 are only now moderating. We all know that drivers, particularly younger drivers, have been locked out of obtaining insurance for a long time. The Taoiseach talks a good game but his claim that this has been a priority for Government is at odds with the facts. The Bill I mentioned came through the House in 2017 and the Government has actively blocked it by refusing to sign a money message for more than two years. The Bill then went out to a public consultation that was not necessary. It is only now, precisely because this issue is arising on the doorsteps, that the Government has very reluctantly agreed to move and to act on the legislation. This Bill is about revamping insurance contracts and introducing a very necessary level of transparency.I ask the Taoiseach again, in the interests of consumers, fair competition and above all people who are still being fleeced by insurance premiums that are through the roof if he will commit to allow the passage of this legislation without further impediment, put his money where his mouth is and demonstrate by action, however belated, that this is a priority for Government."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-05-15	---	2	Last night, the House debated Second Stage of Sinn Féin's Bill to provide for the constitutional right of every citizen to adequate, secure and affordable housing, a key recommendation of the Constitutional Convention. Fine Gael and its partners, Fianna Fáil, have chosen to say no to that proposal and both parties have stated that they will not support the legislation when it is voted on tomorrow afternoon. In the midst of an unprecedented housing crisis, that is an absolutely despicable position for the Government to adopt, particularly considering the support for this legislation by the United Nations special rapporteur for adequate housing.The Raise the Roof demonstration will take place here in Dublin next Saturday and it will demand real solutions to our housing emergency, including the constitutional right to a home. I am asking the Taoiseach in advance of that demonstration to do the right thing and change his mind on the matter. He should support the provision of a constitutional right to a home. I also urge Fianna Fáil, which has much to say by way of criticism of the Government's housing policy, to step up and support this very basic and necessary demand.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-05-14	---	1	Tá ceist agam faoi broadband arís. Caithfidh mé a rá go bhfuil sé dochreidte go bhfuil Granahan McCourt ag íoc €220 milliún agus an cáiníocóir ag íoc €3 billiún. It is crucial that we deliver high-speed broadband to rural Ireland because people want, need and deserve it. That means actual delivery, not delivering an announcement or a pipe dream. There are very serious concerns surrounding the national broadband plan as currently constituted. This very costly plan could still leave homes, farms and businesses across rural Ireland without access.If we think back, this whole process began in 2012, seven years ago, with a commitment that high-speed broadband would be delivered to every home and business in the State by 2020. That promise has been broken spectacularly. Seven years later, not a yard of cabling has been laid or a single pole erected.Under the new plan, homes, farms and businesses in rural Ireland are being asked to wait again. That is not good enough. The Taoiseach has described the plan as a personal crusade, but there are significant flaws that no one in the Government, including the Taoiseach, has yet addressed. In the documents published last week, the capacity of the bidder to deliver the project was cast in serious doubt, while the capacity of the Department to oversee it has been similarly questioned. Why have those issues not been addressed? The bidding process utterly failed to deliver a competitive tender. In addition, it has been highlighted that the bidder does not have adequate skin in the game and could walk away from the project after it has recouped its investment. What does the Taoiseach say to that? The Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment, Deputy Bruton, has confirmed that the firm in question will invest €220 million, yet the State will invest €3 billion in initial capital. The Taoiseach has stated that this is the largest ever State investment in rural Ireland. In reality, it represents a massive State subsidy to a private firm in respect of infrastructure the State will not own. That is unbelievable.We all agree rural Ireland needs high-speed broadband but the unfortunate reality is that more than 500,000 homes and businesses are still without it and will be for years to come. Will the Taoiseach express absolute confidence in the deal? Is he prepared to stand over it and guarantee delivery of rural broadband? Will he publish the full details of the contract between the State and Granahan McCourt?I thank the Taoiseach for that. The best way to proceed is for the contract to be made public. If I am correct, I understand the Minister, Deputy Bruton, has undertaken to make that request of Granahan McCourt. This is the best way to go forward. I do not accept the Taoiseach's analysis that risk is being equally shared. Perhaps, more importantly, that is not the conclusion arrived at by the Secretary General of the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform. By his estimation, the deal is front-loaded by the taxpayer. While acknowledging there are break points at year four and year six for a State review, he points out that at that those stages the State will have invested €1.19 billion and €1.95 billion, respectively. He also sets out that by 2026 the taxpayer will have committed €2.2 billion while the private company will have its money back by 2028. That does not sound like a good deal for the taxpayer. The seeds of this mess reside in the tendering process itself which, from the very beginning, did not afford any real competitive tension or edge and here we are.I ask the Taoiseach for reassurance on the issue of delivery because not alone is this plan very expensive but the really alarming caution presented to us in the documents last week is the question mark over capacity to deliver. I want the Taoiseach to be very explicit on this issue. Is he absolutely sure that rural broadband can be delivered?On what basis does the Taoiseach assert this certainty?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-05-14	---	2	I am proud to stand here this evening and support this Bill. The Bill is intended to provide all citizens with a constitutional right to adequate, secure and affordable housing and to give effect to the decision by 80% of participants in the Constitutional Convention that such a right should be enshrined in Bunreacht na hÉireann. Providing for the constitutional right to a home will oblige the State to make reasonable provision to vindicate that right through its policies and actions.This is not a novel idea. More than 80 countries around the world provide for the right to a home in their constitutions and providing for such a right in Ireland is a position supported by the United Nations special rapporteur for adequate housing. It is the right thing to do. That is why we in Sinn Féin are moving this Bill this evening and calling on every Deputy here, including Government Deputies, to support it. We are in the midst of an unprecedented housing crisis in this State. It is a crisis that is out of control and which worsens with every passing day. We all know the statistics, the figures and the numbers. They make for abhorrent reading. The reality, however, is there is really no way to quantify the social and human cost of a crisis that now permeates every part of our society.Families with good incomes, that would never have faced difficulties in securing a place to live in years gone by, now live in fear that a hike in their rent could push them into homelessness. Young people, as well as couples in their 20s, 30s and into their 40s, unlike their parents before them, have no prospect of ever being able to afford their own home. They are caught in a rent trap. They are paying out-of-control rents and unable to save up for a deposit. Tens of thousands of low and middle-income families, once able to secure council houses or affordable homes, now languish on waiting lists that will never be cleared.Thousands of children go to bed every night in family hubs and bed and breakfasts deprived of a basic right that should not be a luxury in childhood, that is, somewhere to call home. Behind every outworking of this crisis are real lives and real people. The Government, in the guise of the Taoiseach and the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, just does not get that. They persist in peddling a lie that the Government's housing plan is working when it is patently clear it has not, is not and will not. They do not seem to understand the predicament of tens of thousands of people. In fact, last year the Taoiseach advised young people who wish to buy a home to ask their parents for the money for a deposit.Let me assure the Dáil that those who can do that are few and far between. This nonsense just goes to show how out of touch with reality the decision makers are. We have people on the Government benches formulating housing policy who simply do not understand or care about the struggles of ordinary people. Perhaps that is because those in government will never struggle. Perhaps it is because those in government believe they represent those who can run to mammy and daddy for a deposit. They really should know that is not an option for the vast majority of people. It is not the world in which most people live and it is ludicrous and preposterous to suggest that. Coupled with that is an ideological opposition on the part those in government to State intervention in the housing market. That is because it is most unlikely that those in government will ever face the prospect of spending a night in emergency accommodation and perhaps that is the crux of the problem.The truth is that we can bring the housing crisis under control. We can build homes and we can house every citizen in this State. That will only be possible, however, if there is a will to do so at every level and that has to start at the top. We need a change of direction and a change of policy. We need bold and urgent action. We need to double investment in social and affordable housing to deliver homes. We need to introduce a temporary tax relief for renters, alongside an emergency rent freeze for three years. We also need to move now to enshrine the right to housing in the Constitution. Real courage, real vision and real leadership are called for. It is time to call a halt to inaction. That is why I urge all Deputies, from all parties and none, to support the Bill.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-05-08	---	1	This is a cynical way for the Government to do its business. I do not know what, if any, explanation there is for publication of these documents five minutes before Leaders' Questions. I am also not sure where the Taoiseach is. As the Head of the Government, the Taoiseach is the person to whom questions should be put and who should give the answers on behalf of the Government. I support the proposal that we adjourn. We must read this documentation so we can put questions in an informed manner.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-05-08	---	2	After decades of neglect of rural Ireland, having asset-stripped rural Ireland and having delivered one broken promise after another, now on the eve of an election, the Government pulls what I can only describe as a cynical political stunt - a confidence trick. The documentation, which is voluminous and which it will take some to read in its totality, reflects that there is a fundamental question mark around the ability of the preferred bidder to deliver the rural broadband that we all seek.It sets out the best case scenario, which is that the Minister's very expensive plan goes ahead, expenditure will be re-profiled and local authority social housing, the Tralee wastewater network, Kilkenny regional water supply scheme, the Sligo western distributor road, the Killaloe bypass, the Dunkettle interchange, 18 primary schools, new ambulance bases, and so on and so forth will be taken off the table.Even in the best case scenario, should this proceed, the Government will give with one hand to rural Ireland and take away with the other. There is a worst case scenario wherein billions of euro in taxpayers' money gets poured down a black hole, we are left with what amounts to a very expensive white elephant and rural Ireland is still left without the broadband it needs. I said many times to the Taoiseach - and it is unfortunate that he is not here - that the State was in a very weak position because of the shambles that the Government has overseen and that it was Granahan McCourt that held all of the cards. It seems now, through this documentation, that my position has been vindicated.I invite the Minister to please tell us the figures. We know that the taxpayer is to have skin in the game to the tune of €3 billion. What is the figure for Granahan McCourt? What is the liability for that private equity firm? How is it that the documentation, although redacted, insinuates that the sum involved is a fraction of the €3 billion that the taxpayer will have to cough up? I do not accept that the Minister cannot name the figure. I would be more alarmed, were that possible, if he was proposing, notwithstanding the very clear advice given by the Department, to advance while not knowing or maybe not even caring, what stake the private equity investor proposes to provide. The Minister should name the figure and tell us. It is €3 billion of taxpayer's money but how much private money is going into this venture?How much?The Minister is very coy but he does not display the same reticence in naming the figure for the taxpayer, with €3 billion rolling off his tongue. He does not have to convince anyone in this Chamber or beyond of the need for rural broadband; far from it. I remind him that officials in the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform - and I understand their concerns were also held by other officials - said that there is a question mark around the deliverability of the project. Let us just say that out loud. The Minister is speaking as though this is a certainty but the history of this debacle is that there is anything but certainty around the delivery of rural broadband, bar the certainty that, as he said, 25% of our people do not have access to it.I do not doubt for a second that the preferred bidder has considerable expertise. I am not questioning that. I am not questioning the fact that it has been involved in very big projects; no doubt it has been but this is the first occasion on which it will acquire €3 billion of taxpayers' money. On that basis, if this is to have any credibility at all, particularly given that its credibility has been deemed highly questionable by very informed persons, the Minister needs to state on the public record the quantum of money involved. How much? What fraction of €3 billion is going to be advanced by way of private money?How much private money is involved?How much private money? Is it €500 million? Is it €100 million?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-04-17	---	1	"With every day that passes, the process surrounding the national broadband plan becomes ever more reminiscent of the debacle that now surrounds the cost of the national children's hospital. When I pressed the Taoiseach on this here yesterday, he admitted and confirmed for the first time that the cost of the broadband plan could reach €3 billion, despite the original cost estimate being in the region of €500 million. Despite the Taoiseach's attempt to skate around this yesterday by arguing that the plan had changed, the fact is that in 2012 the commitment made by the then Minister, Mr. Pat Rabbitte, as part of the Fine Gael-Labour coalition was to ensure the roll-out of high-speed broadband to every home and business throughout the State. That was the commitment - plain and simple.We can argue the toss around semantics. The fact is that the aim of the national broadband plan has not changed, but what has changed, incredibly, is its cost. According to the Taoiseach yesterday, it will now cost six times what was expected. The overspend could run into billions of euro. To top it all, the Taoiseach advises that the infrastructure will be in the ownership of the consortium but that the State could, 25 years on, spend more public money to buy that infrastructure back. One could not make this up. It is utterly ludicrous.The unfortunate reality of all of this mess is that, as the Taoiseach said, more than 500,000 homes, businesses and farms right across rural areas are left still without broadband, despite repeated assurances and repeated announcements. It beggars belief that this is still an issue. We have no date still for a decision to be taken. We have no date for commencement. The commitment to deliver high-speed broadband by 2020 will undoubtedly be broken. That is the reality. This process has been utterly chaotic.The Taoiseach stated last October, in the aftermath of the resignation of the then Minister, Deputy Denis Naughten, that he would make this national broadband plan a ""personal crusade"". He also said, ""I promised I will make it happen"". He told the Dáil in November that he received two reports on this matter from the Department at least every fortnight. When exactly will the rest of us get a proper report? When will we get clarity? We were supposed to have an announcement before Easter. That is now not going to happen, despite the Taoiseach's assurances that it would.We do not now know whether this plan is going ahead or not. The 500,000 homes, businesses and farms, it seems, are to be left in the lurch for a considerable period. The Taoiseach has no notion of any cost or budget for this plan. Above all, people in rural areas are left with no clarity as to what is happening. We can all agree that is utterly unacceptable. When will we have an announcement? When will be have the real figures? When will be have access to that? Above all, when will people in rural areas know that there will, in fact, be a national broadband plan roll-out?It is a small mercy that we were not reliant on the Taoiseach and his Government for rural electrification because there would still be debate about Ardnacrusha power plant. We would still be in the dark, lighting candles and hoping for the best.The Government used the wrong procurement process. The process was supposed to generate a dynamic of competitiveness and yet there is a sole bidder left. By definition, that leaves the Government vulnerable in terms of cost. The Cabinet and Government sources consistently briefed that the cost of this scheme would be €500 million. The Taoiseach quoted a memo brought to Cabinet in 2014 but I am advised by Deputy Howlin that a subsequent memo was brought by the then Minister of State and former Deputy, Alex White. The Taoiseach is being selective in his quotation of memos.We are now left in a situation that is utterly farcical. The Taoiseach states that he is not sure whether he is going to accept this bid from the sole bidder, the cost of which will be six times that of the original estimate. The Taoiseach still protests, with a straight face, that he is the Taoiseach and that this is the Government that will deliver broadband to rural Ireland. Quite frankly, nobody believes that at this stage and I suspect he does not believe it either.I ask for more clarity in the Taoiseach's answers. Can he give us a precise date on which the Cabinet will make its decision? Can he give us access to these memos and all of the information and data that he possesses?That is just daft.No."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-04-17	---	2	Deputy Calleary sounded decidedly clingy in his contribution. The Taoiseach may wish to reassure him after this sitting that all is well with Fine Gael and its partners in Fianna Fáil.The Minister for Children and Youth Affairs is preparing legislation to provide lawfully for the phased forensic excavation of the Tuam mother and baby home. The commission's report into the burial arrangements of mother and baby homes makes completing this legislation all the more urgent. The report finds that the burial chambers in Tuam were not a recognised burial ground and did not provide for the dignified internment of human remains, and the House should note the importance of this statement. I am sure all our thoughts today are with the families whose loved ones remain interred in Tuam. Requests for voluntary DNA samples must be advanced and time must be set aside for the Minister to come before the House to discuss this report and set out a timeframe for the excavation in Tuam. Will the Minister therefore come before the House to make a statement and take questions on this matter immediately after the recess?They have been left entirely.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-04-16	---	1	"The world looked on with horror at the inferno at Notre Dame cathedral. I and my colleagues extend our sympathies to the people of Paris, in particular, and to everybody who visited and loved that great cathedral. It will be rebuilt.The Taoiseach stated last December that the cost of the national broadband plan roll-out could amount to many multiples of what was originally estimated. He reiterated that view in recent weeks. We are again, perhaps, faced with a scandalous cost overrun that might be commensurate with the debacle surrounding the construction of the national children's hospital. It is a scenario where a vital piece of infrastructure desperately needed in much of rural Ireland is way over budget and is left at the mercy of one investor. I do not think this is an accidental or incidental occurrence because this is again the result of a botched tendering process.The completion of this process was targeted for June 2017 but it is ongoing two years later. There is just one bidder now remaining for the contract, leaving the Government and taxpayers in an extremely precarious position. The original estimated cost for the plan was some €500 million. We are advised now that it could, in fact, run into billions of euro instead. Should that transpire, it will be a damning indictment of the Taoiseach's party's management, or mismanagement, of the public finances. We need, therefore, to get to the bottom of what is happening here. The Taoiseach stated in February that he wanted to be transparent on these matters and that he would consult with the Oireachtas. That never happened.When will we have clarity on the cost of the national broadband roll-out? It was supposed to be announced before Easter. The Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment, Deputy Bruton, has stated that is not now going to happen despite repeated assurances that it would. The real casualties of this entire debacle are the more than 500,000 homes still without access to high-speed broadband. We still do not have a date for commencement seven years after this plan was originally announced and the commitment to deliver high-speed broadband to every home and business by 2020 is going to be broken spectacularly.The process has been chaotic and, frankly, farcical. When will we have clarity on when people will actually get access to high-speed broadband? A specific model for the broadband plan has been adhered to whereby the project will be conducted by a private company to which ownership will revert after 25 years.The Government is now tied to one bidder which has the bargaining power, not the State. If the process fails or the Government decides to ditch it, what is plan B?Leaving households, businesses and communities in the lurch is not a policy option here.The Taoiseach says he wants more time but we know from a response to a parliamentary question submitted by my colleague, an Teachta Stanley, that 80 civil servants and consultants have been working on this tender process for over two years. The whole process has been marked by delay, which has generated massive frustration and impatience right across those rural homes and communities which the Taoiseach describes, and now he says he wants more time. The Taoiseach challenged me on the using the term ""multiples of the €500 million"" but it is the phrase he used himself. He said it would likely cost multiples and, as such, it is his language not mine. What we want to know now is the final cost.It is astonishing that the Head of Government would take such a  approach to final costings. He should have a view as to the affordability----------or price range. In a similar manner to his colleague, the Minister for Health, Deputy Harris, regarding a hospital that will perhaps be the most expensive ever built anywhere in the world, the Taoiseach persists with this  approach.I have asked two questions. I would like an answer to them. I actually asked three on the issue of cost, the issue of timing----------and, if all else fails, plan B. We have offered the Government a plan B by way of using the established ESB network.The Government has resisted that thus far. Will the Taoiseach consider it if the situation comes to that?A attitude to money.No.No."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-04-10	---	1	"Our health service is in a state of perpetual crisis. Overcrowding at our accident and emergency departments and hospitals worsens by the day and yesterday the Midlands Regional Hospital in Mullingar became the latest hospital to announce it was at maximum capacity and to advise patients to stay away. That follows the dangerous level of overcrowding we have witnessed in Cork University Hospital, in University Hospital Limerick, Mayo University Hospital, Castlebar and Kerry and on and on it goes. Hospital waiting lists continue to grow and we now have the worst waiting lists in Europe.Nurses and midwives have had to engage in industrial action, and general practitioners have protested outside the gates of Leinster House here because of the Government's refusal to adequately invest in primary care. Now to top it all we have the scandalous cost overrun in respect of the national children's hospital. All of this has happened on the watch of the Minister for Health, Deputy Harris.The PwC report, published yesterday, shows that mistakes were made at every turn and illustrates how a risky and untested two-stage procurement strategy was pursued, which was known to have grave risks in terms of cost escalation. The sole advantage of producing a quick outcome was the opportunity for a Fine Gael Minister to cut a ribbon early.The report highlights significant issues with governance and oversight and points to the serious matter of non-compliance with the public service spending code. It raises questions about the future of the project and the ability of the development board and the Minister for Health to deliver it within the current expected budget of €1.7 billion. Unfortunately, they have proved time and again unable to navigate this project and are responsible for the €450 million overrun which may grow.The Taoiseach responded yesterday that the report makes for ""grim reading"". Ministers have said that they ""accept all its findings"". The Members of Government need to be reminded that they are not spectators to all of this, they are the authors of this fiasco and the people responsible. I understand that Government has accepted responsibility for this shambles. Who is accountable for the clear and gross incompetence, administrative, professional and political, and who will be held to account?For those of us who live in the real world, let me set out what has happened. There has been a €450 million overrun and counting. Those are public moneys that will have to be found somewhere. This whole fiasco has been overseen by a Minister who is clearly incompetent. At this stage he is a lame duck Minister whom the Government, with the assistance of Fianna Fáil, insists on keeping in office. This fiasco has happened on the watch of an out of touch Government that is only concerned with cutting ribbons and is clearly not capable of managing public - taxpayers' - money. To add insult to injury, the Government refuses to afford any level of accountability. I put a very simple question to the Government. Who is accountable? We know that the Government is responsible, we know that its partners in Fianna Fáil are responsible for allowing a Minister or Ministers who are asleep at the wheel, as Deputy Micheál Martin puts it, to continue in office, but I would like an answer from Government on who is accountable for this fiasco, for these public moneys and for this gross incompetence. Who will be held to account and how will they be held to account?It is not an underestimate, it is an overestimate"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-04-10	---	2	The programme for Government commits that the Government will actively fulfil its mandate as co-guarantor of the Good Friday Agreement. Today marks the 21st anniversary of the signing of the Good Friday Agreement. That agreement has delivered peace and fundamentally changed relationships across Ireland and the relationship with Britain. It promised power sharing, equality and the potential for constitutional change, and it was endorsed by the vast majority of people. Sinn Féin supports the provisions of the agreements. We meet our obligations under the agreements. Unfortunately, there are those who continue to oppose the agreement, but they cannot be allowed to undermine the hopes of all who share this island. The DUP, as we know, never signed up to the Good Friday Agreement and consistently opposes equality. The British Government is imposing Brexit and is refusing to honour its obligations under the agreements. The Good Friday Agreement and its institutions are being actively undermined by the actions of an irresponsible British Government and a reckless DUP.The agreement is an international one between two sovereign governments. What steps is the Government taking to ensure that the legal obligations of the British Government will be honoured and the hopes of a generation realised? Will the Government convene the British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference to map a way forward consistent with the Good Friday Agreement?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-04-09	---	1	Last Tuesday, I raised with the Tánaiste the critical issue of hospital overcrowding, and given the continued state of crisis in our hospitals, I want to raise it again today with the Taoiseach. Last week there were serious problems in Cork University Hospital, CUH, and a black status escalation was declared, which meant that the hospital was at maximum capacity and was deemed unsafe to admit further patients. The outworking of that has had serious implications and two specific incidents were reported in the  newspaper yesterday, which illustrate the extent of the problems at Cork University Hospital.A general practitioner, GP, in Bandon, Dr. Mary Roycroft, has said that an 84 year old patient refused to attend the emergency department at CUH, despite being very unwell, and told her that she would rather die at home than be in there. She said that the patient's response is not unique and that many other patients have expressed similar fears. These are patients who need to be in hospital but who are unwilling and afraid to attend accident and emergency services because of persistent overcrowding. That is a scandalous situation. In addition, an elderly man who fell in Skibbereen last week was left lying on a pavement for nearly two hours while waiting for an ambulance to take him to CUH. The ambulance in question was one of eight that were queueing outside the hospital waiting to offload patients and it never came. This man was eventually taken to hospital by a paramedic crew from County Kerry. This is no way for our health service to operate and yet it is the reality. It is in a state of perpetual chaos and no meaningful action is being taken to address the extent of this crisis. That is a disgrace.University Hospital Limerick was similarly in a state of chaos last week and that shows no sign of letting up.There are 55 patients on trolleys there today and Limerick is yet again the worst affected hospital in the State. State-wide today, there are 631 patients on trolleys, the highest number in 2019 so far according to the INMO. There are 55, as I said, in Limerick, 42 at Cork University Hospital, 50 at Sligo University Hospital, 39 in Beaumont, and 37 in Galway. I am advised by Deputy Ferris that there are 36 patients on trolleys in Kerry University Hospital and nine sitting in chairs. It was equally chaotic yesterday. On and on it goes. It is frightening. Overcrowding, as the Taoiseach knows, impacts on patients and puts them at risk. It also affects the health and well-being of staff. Both of these things are intolerable. This is no longer a winter problem or one that is amenable to a seasonal intervention. It is year-round and State-wide. The Taoiseach has failed to get to grips with it. Quite simply, I ask what he and his Minister for Health, Deputy Harris, plan to do to respond to the capacity crisis in a meaningful way.Where is it?Having said that he does not wish to deal with statistics, the Taoiseach reached for statistics. He has typified the stories I told him as accusations. They are nothing of the sort.They are the experiences of two people in Cork, namely, an 84 year old woman and an elderly man who fell and was left on the pavement for two hours. That is not an accusation. It is a scandal and an utter disgrace. I am shocked that the Taoiseach seems to be so out of touch that he would classify that as an accusation. These are the stories behind the statistics that are so regularly quoted.The Taoiseach has said that he is pulling out all of the stops and is on top of this. All of the evidence contradicts that. The evidence tells us that this is a crisis and that the Government cannot manage it. It tells us that this is a disaster. Staff in Kerry told Deputy Ferris so earlier today and people are saying the same in Cork. I was in Mayo last week, where the emergency department and its staff is under enormous pressure. The Taoiseach seems to be totally out of touch and is blissfully unaware of this. I put it to the Taoiseach that, rather than providing any positive solutions, it is quite shocking that the Minister has spoken recently about a recruitment freeze and an overtime ban. How on earth will that do anything other than worsen the capacity crisis at accident and emergency departments?Perhaps the Taoiseach knows more about the situation in the North than in the jurisdiction of which he is Taoiseach.Fine Gael thinks it is hilarious.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-04-03	---	1	I thank the Ceann Comhairle or, rather, the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. I am sorry.I was just getting the Chair's title right.Last week, I raised with the Taoiseach the UN special rapporteur on adequate housing's damning condemnation of the Government's record on housing. New research published in  further illustrates the points I raised last week and shows that many households and individuals are paying more than half of their incomes on rent. Those in the private rental sector, young and old, are being hit time and again with unbearable rental costs and hikes. All the while, the Taoiseach and the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, stand idly by.For many people, owning a home is but a pipedream. In real terms, home ownership is beyond reach for an entire generation. Not only are houses unaffordable, but rents are at such a level that no one can put away a few quid to save for a deposit. Many of these people are working in good jobs and earn good salaries. They are up bright and early. They are people who, at any other time, would be well able to afford a decent home but are now under serious pressure, yet the Taoiseach does not seem to grasp that. Those who can ask their parents for the money for a deposit are few and far between. He should know that.The housing system is broken, yet the Government's response is to stick with its plan even though that is failing spectacularly. Sticking with the plan is predicated on preserving the interests of landlords, not on giving renters a break, which ought to be the Government's first priority. On Monday, it was revealed that Cairn Homes was to sell 300 apartments in Dublin wholesale to a vulture fund, which, in turn, will charge exorbitant rents. This is playing out now.Yesterday, the Tánaiste stated that the legislation relating to rent pressure zones is to be extended to the end of 2021, but that will not deal in any real way with the magnitude of the problem we face. We need real solutions, not piecemeal actions. We need more social homes, more private homes at affordable prices, more cost rental homes, tax relief for renters and real rent control. We also need legislation to prevent buy-to-let landlords seeking vacant possession; in other words, to prevent them from sending people into homelessness in order that they can sell their properties. That legislation will be before us and a vote will be taken on it tomorrow. I urge the Government to support it even though the Government and its friends in Fianna Fáil have previously opposed it. I am asking the Taoiseach to do this one right thing as a signal and as the beginning of a process of the Government getting to grips with the rental crisis, which affects approximately 1 million people across the State.Leo fiddles while Rome burns. I am glad the Taoiseach has shared with us his deep commitment to homeownership. I am glad he at least recognises that there is a crisis and that homeownership for a whole generation is off the cards unless their mammy and daddy can help out with a deposit. The Taoiseach is missing the point of my question, perhaps deliberately. I have set out for him the real pressure that renters are under. He will be aware, as Focus Ireland has reported, that up to 70% of families presenting as homeless come from the private rental sector.I have asked the Taoiseach to take one concrete action, set aside the rhetoric and do something constructive by backing the Sinn Féin legislation that is before the Dáil. That legislation will ensure that buy-to-let landlords cannot insist on vacant possession to sell the property because that renders these families homeless. I am sure that people outside the Dáil are sick to the back teeth of the housing crisis and politicians talking about it. They want action and this is one solid action that could be taken, that could prove to people, by deed rather than word, that the Taoiseach is serious about getting to grips with family homelessness and the crisis in the rental sector.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-04-03	---	2	Page 55 of the programme for Government commits to timely access to orthodontic care. More than 7,500 children who availed of public orthodontic services in Dublin are to have their files reviewed. Many of these children were left irreversibly damaged after services were withdrawn in the mid-1990s. A report commissioned in February 2015 found that patient safety was put at risk and recommended a wider review, which is now under way. Experts at the time worked under the agreement that the report would be published in full, but that has not happened. In reply to a parliamentary question tabled by Deputy O'Reilly in December 2018, the Minister committed to releasing an update on this issue in February 2019. It is now April 2019, but no report has been published to date. Will the Minister, Deputy Harris, publish the 2015 report and the wider review in full? Will he give a date for publication? If not, why not?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-04-02	---	1	Over the last number of months, we have regrettably borne witness to the scale of the crisis facing our health service on the watch of the Minister, Deputy Harris. The debacle surrounding the cost of the national children's hospital rumbles on, nurses and midwives have had to engage in industrial action, one in seven consultant posts is vacant and support staff have announced their intention to ballot for industrial action. All the while, hospital waiting lists continue to grow and hundreds of patients are left on hospital trolleys, day in, day out.Last night, in Cork University Hospital, there was a status black escalation declared, with patients attending the emergency department facing extreme delays of up to 12 hours and with services reaching breaking point. A status black escalation is declared, I understand, when the hospital is at maximum capacity and when it is deemed unsafe to admit further patients.There is a capacity crisis in the health service and this is very concerning. There were 70 people on trolleys in Cork University Hospital this morning, with 570 people on trolleys across the State. Yesterday, in Limerick, there were more people on trolleys than in Dublin's nine hospitals combined, according to the INMO. I am sure the Tánaiste will agree that this is shocking.There are also reports that during the status black escalation up to eight ambulances were lined up outside the accident and emergency at Cork University Hospital waiting to hand over patients. I am told that one of those ambulances was forced to wait for more than four hours. That is the sort of situation that puts patient and staff at serious risk and it is unacceptable.We have raised the capacity crisis over and over again with the Government over the past number of years - nurses were on the picket line raising this very issue just over a month ago - and all we see by way of response is inaction and indifference on the part of the Minister. They are the ones who insisted that Deputy Harris remain  when we, in Sinn Féin, tabled a motion of no confidence in him.What we need is a robust response. Last night, in the Tánaiste's own city, things got so bad that a black escalation, the highest level of escalation possible, was declared. Staff tell us that it is the worst they have ever seen. The Tánaiste must surely agree that this demands an adequate response. Can he tell me what is to happen at Cork University Hospital in the first instance, given this escalation over the past 24 hours?More generally, what is the Government's plan to respond to the capacity crisis in a manner that will get to the root cause of the problem and address the crisis sooner rather than later?The status black escalation, as the Tánaiste knows, is essentially a declaration that a hospital is no longer safe. In Cork University Hospital, as I said, the position was unsafe for patients in the first instance but also for staff. Some of those staff, who have worked within the system for decades and up to 30 years, told us directly that they have never seen the like of this before. It was dangerous. I described the scenario for the Tánaiste, with ambulances lined up outside the hospital and one that I know of that waited for more than four hours to hand over a patient. This is a very serious accident waiting to happen and it is playing out on this Government's watch. I am advised that the actions described by the Tánaiste, including the various meetings, are standard procedure in any event for hospitals on a full capacity protocol. The Tánaiste has not described for us any kind of emergency intervention commensurate with the crisis that has unfolded at this hospital.I ask the Tánaiste again what additional action this Government will take to intervene in the case of Cork University Hospital. When will he accept there is a capacity crisis within the system? What are the plans of the Minister for Health and the Government to address it?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-03-27	---	1	I join the Taoiseach in extending our sympathy to and expressing our solidarity with Laura's family and friends as they remember her today. I am also sorry to hear of the passing of John Browne. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam dílis.Yesterday the United Nations special rapporteur for adequate housing lists, Leilani Farha, issued a damning condemnation of the Government's record on housing for allowing vulture funds to buy up large numbers of properties across the State, only to let them at scandalous prices. She said the Government was facilitating the financialisation of housing through providing preferential tax breaks for corporate landlords and standing over weak tenant protections. We know from last month's homelessness figures that there are now more homeless persons in the State than at any time in our history. The figure is almost 10,000. There are tens of thousands of people on council housing waiting lists, while social and affordable homes are being constructed at a snail's pace. People in the private rental sector are being hit time and again, with rent increases continuing to spiral, and all the while house prices continue to rise. For many, owning a home is now nothing but a pipedream.The response from the Taoiseach and the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, has been to stick with the plan and let the market do its thing. It may not have occurred to the Taoiseach yet but his plan is not working. It is failing spectacularly and the housing system in the State is broken. This is not just my assessment or that of Sinn Féin but the verdict of the United Nations that corporate interests are trumping the needs of ordinary people and families in the housing market. In the midst of an unprecedented housing crisis, we have the likes of I-RES REIT and Blackstone making massive profits, paying minimal taxes and fleecing tenants. It is ridiculous, unacceptable and must stop.We need a radical rethink and action to benefit those who are struggling and in need of a much-needed break. Will the Taoiseach accept that there is an urgent need to rein in corporate interests in the private rental market? It is not that solutions have not been offered because there are solutions. The Taoiseach and the Minister have refused to act and listen. True to form, their partners in Fianna Fáil bury their heads in the sand, too. The Government could do the right and necessary things. It could introduce with immediate effect a three-year rent freeze and temporary tax relief for renters. It could support the legislation that will be brought before the Dáil by Deputy Ó Broin tomorrow to prevent buy-to-let landlords from seeking vacant possession. The Government could avail of and implement these alternatives. We need bold and meaningful action because the UN assessment of the Government's failures needs to be a wake-up call. Does the Taoiseach accept the assessment of the UN special rapporteur?The Taoiseach's position could not be more ideological. He is blinded by his own ideology and prevented from doing the very obvious, common-sense, pragmatic and necessary things by a fierce ideology that insists on the market sorting it out and that the State and the Government sitting on the sidelines as observers, crossing their fingers and hoping for the best in trying to talk the issue away. The Government is failing. The United Nations, not Sinn Féin, states the Government is allowing faceless corporations to wreak havoc on the rights of tenants. That is its finding and a damning indictment of the Government which has its ideological position. That is where it sits. I am not here to enter into an ideological debate but to say directly to the Government that it needs to do the necessary things to protect tenants. Its so-called rent control measures have failed. We have made propositions about having a rent freeze and providing tax relief for renters. Critically, a measure will be brought to the floor of the House tomorrow----------by my colleague, Deputy Ó Broin, to prevent landlords from seeking vacant possession. To translate it into real English, it means preventing landlords from casting families into homelessness in order that they can sell on properties.I am appealing to the Government to support that measure.The Government is not building houses.Ah, look after the landlords.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-03-27	---	2	The programme for Government commits to targeted improvements in public services with a particular focus on disability issues. It also commits to ensuring that transport service provision for people with disabilities is fit for purpose and consistent with their needs, yet Bus Éireann's brand new, state-of-the-art city buses are actually less accessible for wheelchair users than the older buses they have replaced. My colleague, Deputy Munster, raised serious accessibility concerns about the new single-decker buses last year but her warnings fell on deaf ears. There was no engagement with disability groups in advance of introducing the fleet and we have also learned that the buses have not been built to Irish standards. I commend the campaigning work of a young man called Karl Cretzan, whom I met earlier in the week in Waterford. Karl is a wheelchair user and has been to the fore in highlighting the shortfalls of this new fleet. On Karl's behalf and on behalf of all of our citizens with disabilities who rely on public transport, I ask the Taoiseach what he and his Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport are going to do to rectify the inaccessibility of this new fleet of buses.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-03-26	---	1	The Oireachtas Joint Committee on Climate Action is meeting today and tomorrow to sign off on its report which is due to be published on Thursday. The Taoiseach, Fine Gael and its partners in Fianna Fáil support increasing carbon taxes and it is almost certain that that recommendation will feature in the committee's report. Regardless, the Taoiseach has indicated that it is, in effect, Government policy. At the weekend he said increasing carbon taxes was on the table for inclusion in the October budget and that increases would be in line with the committee's recommendation of €80 per tonne, or four times the current level.Climate change is a massive problem. It is perhaps the defining challenge of our generation. There is an all of society acceptance that IT must be tackled and that we are already way behind where we need to be in tackling the issue effectively. The way to fight climate change is not to penalise ordinary families and working people by increasing their fuel costs or utility bills. That is not something Sinn Féin will support. We will not support any increase in carbon tax that will not protect low and middle income earners and ensure the big polluters will carry their responsibilities and pay their way. We already have very high fuel and energy costs in this state and the current carbon tax has not lowered emissions levels. Carbon emissions have, in fact, increased and loading another layer of cost and tax on ordinary people will not change behaviour, yet the Government seems intent on pursuing this course of action. Unless it puts measures in place to give families alternatives, a carbon tax is just a punitive tax and must absolutely be opposed. The Taoiseach should be aware that there are families who are at the pin of their collar. They are just about getting by and should not have to pay the price because of the actions of big corporate polluters. I hope the Taoiseach agrees with that sentiment. We need to see climate change tackled in a progressive way that will combine social justice and fairness with the obvious environmental demands. People need to be able to switch to alternatives. That means that we need a comprehensive retrofitting programme. People need to be able to switch to heat pumps easily, make the change to electric vehicles in a cost effective way and avail of microgeneration. We also need real investment in public transport.The type of carbon tax the Government is proposing is not the solution. It would be ineffective, regressive and only creates the illusion of action. Can the Taoiseach accept that, as currently devised, the Government's carbon tax plan will impact disproportionately on low and middle income families who cannot afford to switch to electric cars and make their homes more fuel efficient? Will he accept that this approach is wrong and commit to going back to the drawing board and scrapping the Government's regressive and out of touch proposals?Sadly, the evidence of this fee and dividend model that the Taoiseach is advocating, whereby people receive their money back on the carbon tax they pay, has been proven not to work. It has not worked in British Columbia in Canada, where emissions have not gone down. It has not worked in Norway and it will not work here. It will not work for the very simple reason that we cannot change people's behaviours in ways that they cannot afford. It may well be that the tax Fine Gael will negotiate with its coalition partners in Fianna Fáil may facilitate the better-off in society to improve the energy rating of their homes. They may even invest in an expensive electric car. I can tell the Taoiseach that for the broad mass of people, that is simply beyond their reach. Approaches that do work are investment in public infrastructure and investment in programmes that facilitate and support people to change their behaviour. What does work is straight-up investment in the green economy and green jobs. This make-believe scenario will not work.I am glad to hear the Taoiseach is not going to increase the carbon tax fourfold, although he was quoted over the weekend as making precisely that promise.By what quantum will the Taoiseach increase the tax? Will he be mindful of the fact that we have very high energy prices in the State already and that householders already contribute to helping our environment through the public service obligation, PSO, levy on every electricity bill? That nets €500 million per annum to support renewable energies. I dare say people outside this Chamber do not think they have seen much bang for those particular bucks in terms of protecting the environment.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-03-05	---	1	This morning the Society of St. Vincent de Paul published its Working, Parenting and Struggling report, which is an analysis of the employment and living conditions of one-parent families in Ireland. Its findings are an indictment of the Government's record on poverty prevention and alleviation among single parent families, many of whom are at work. The report finds that one in 11 working lone parents was living below the poverty line in 2012 but that number had jumped to one in five in 2017. The high cost of housing and childcare combined with low levels of income are making it impossible for families to make ends meet. The report finds that the living standards of lone parents in this State are among the worst in Europe. We have the second highest rate of income poverty, persistent poverty and severe deprivation among 15 other EU states. That is shocking. What is most shocking, however, is that the majority of one-parent families, the vast majority of whom are headed by women, are in work. These families are like others. They are people who get up at the crack of dawn but who still struggle and fail to meet their own and their families' basic needs. Our cost of living crisis is leaving hundreds of thousands of people struggling and living in fear of any extra financial burden like a car breaking down or a washing machine packing it in. These are people who work hard to provide for their families. They have a modest aspiration for a decent, happy life but they cannot plan for their future. How can they plan when they cannot make ends meet in the here and now?Low pay, especially in the context of the soaring cost of living, is the real problem. Workers on low wages, in many cases in insecure employment, are being asked to find money to pay for extortionate rents, crazy insurance premia and crushing childcare costs. It is not good enough to brush all of this aside, as the Taoiseach does frequently, with the promise of a meagre tax relief at an ill-defined point in the future. These families do not need a handout but a hand up in the here and now. These are people who work and who want to continue working to give their families and their children a better life. What does the Taoiseach propose to do in the here and now to address the cost of living crisis that is crippling these families? When will he introduce a living wage?The tone of the Taoiseach's response is not unexpected but it is almost depressing. The measures his Government is taking are clearly not working for hundreds of thousands of people across the State but in particular for those families headed by a lone parent.carried a very interesting series on child poverty. If the Taoiseach has not read some of the articles I would recommend them to him. One of the articles compared the standard of living of a mother of two from the midlands with an appropriate counterpart living in another jurisdiction. The article made for incredible reading. The woman concerned is at work. Such are her struggles to ensure her family can get by that she rations the number of times the kids are allowed to boil the kettle. Can one imagine having to count the number of times that a family can boil a kettle in its house? I put it to the Taoiseach that this is how tight things are. Many of the interventions cited by the Taoiseach are, in effect, subsidies for low-pay employment.I am asking for additional time. I will not debate the ins and outs of parenting and the challenges of it, and I am not going to trade statistics with the Taoiseach. I will simply tell the Taoiseach something that he should already know, that is, more needs to be done because people are struggling and suffering.What by way of addition is the Taoiseach going to do now about the cost of living crisis being experienced by families across the land? When will the living wage - not the minimum wage - be the floor and the basic income in this jurisdiction?I want to talk about people.Which is sessional.Does the Taoiseach have to restrict the number of times he boils his kettle?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-02-27	---	1	On 12 February 1989, 30 years ago, Pat Finucane was shot 14 times in front of his wife, Geraldine, and their children as they sat down for Sunday lunch in their Belfast home. Pat was an intelligent man and a committed and dedicated solicitor. He defended his clients and exposed human and civil rights abuses in the North. Pat was highly effective and highly respected. He was very good at his job and, for that, he was murdered.The people who killed Pat were agents of the RUC. The information used to kill Pat was provided by British military intelligence, and the guns used to murder him were supplied by RUC agents. As the Taoiseach knows, Pat's family has campaigned long and hard and with great dignity for a public inquiry into his killing. I pay a special tribute this afternoon to Geraldine and the whole family for never backing down in the face of British Government intransigence and denial.The Taoiseach will be aware that the Finucane family have been in the British Supreme Court over the past year to try to compel the British Government to fulfil its obligation to hold a public inquiry, as agreed at Weston Park in 2001. This morning, that court has ruled that previous inquiries into Pat's murder did not have the capability to establish salient facts into his death and, as such, it has found that an inquiry compliant with Article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights into Pat's murder has not been held and that none of the previous inquiries has satisfied Article 2 obligations.The continued refusal by the British Government to honour its commitment to hold a public inquiry into Pat's killing is one of the many broken commitments of the peace process. The withholding of information on the part of the British Government and the absolute disregard shown to victims in the courts are features of many cases. The Finucane case is not unique. It must stop.At Weston Park in 2001, the British Government agreed to a public inquiry into Pat's murder. This has not happened. That agreement must now be honoured immediately, and the Irish Government must act to secure that. The Taoiseach will recall that this is not just a matter of a commitment in his programme for Government but it is also the stated will of the Oireachtas. Will he join me this afternoon in stating clearly the British Government should immediately fulfil its obligation to hold a public inquiry into the killing of Pat Finucane? Will he relay that demand without delay to the British Government, including the British Prime Minister?I thank the Taoiseach very much for that. I echo his sentiments as regards the honour of Pat Finucane and the effectiveness of his legal and human rights activism. Above all, we must acknowledge today the great dignity and resilience of Geraldine Finucane and her family. Incidentally, I do not know any single person who has met Geraldine Finucane who was not greatly impressed by her, as the Taoiseach clearly was.As he said, the ruling this morning asserts the prerogative of the British Government to do the wrong thing and to break its word, but, more important, it sets out very clearly that the de Silva review was not compliant with Article 2 and that there has not been a full and proper investigation into the murder of Pat Finucane. At Weston Park, it was very clearly agreed, between two sovereign governments and all parties, that such an inquiry would happen. I warmly welcome and acknowledge the fact that the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, will now vigorously pursue this matter. I hope the British Government will, on this occasion, move away from its position of denial of the truth to the Finucane family and that this inquiry can proceed without delay.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-02-26	---	1	Last night, we witnessed the mother and sister of Clodagh Hawe, Mary and Jacqueline, speak about her brutal murder and those of her three sons, Liam, aged 13, Niall, aged 11, and Ryan, aged six, at the hands of her husband and the children's father in August 2016. Anyone who saw last night's programme has been deeply affected by the utterly terrifying and heartbreaking story, as well as by the issues raised by the family concerning the subsequent investigation and the unanswered questions that remain almost three years later. I extend deepest and sincerest sympathies to the family and friends of Ms Hawe, Liam, Niall and Ryan. It is clear from the testimony of Clodagh's family last night that they need answers to the questions they have concerning the murders of Ms Hawe and her three children. The State also needs answers. As legislators, there is an onus on us to ensure the necessary statutory provisions are in place to understand in full how and why these violent crimes occur.I wrote to the Garda Commissioner and the Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Flanagan, earlier this month asking that consideration be given to the introduction of domestic homicide reviews and that these be underpinned by legislation. Such reviews have been in place in Britain since 2011 and are due to be introduced in Northern Ireland following a public consultation process. Domestic homicide reviews take a multi-agency approach to determine the circumstances in which such deaths occur. Organisations such as Women’s Aid have long advocated for the introduction of such reviews in this country. The family and friends of victims should also be included in the review process. That should happen because the reality is that Garda management does not have adequate data on or understanding of these homicides. If there were such understanding, then Mary and Jacqueline would not have had to go on television to advance what are modest requests. They want to understand how or why Clodagh and her children were murdered. Does the Taoiseach support the introduction of domestic homicide reviews? Will he consider introducing them in the future?Families deserve answers to their questions and reviews of this kind can play a very important part in providing those answers. Last night, the family called for reviews of the Coroners Act and laws surrounding exhumations as well as changes to the Succession Act. In a sense they have very publicly made their submission. I am glad that the Minister for Justice and Equality is open to such a submission, but the family also wants an inquiry. They want answers. Will the Minister for Justice and Equality meet the family to agree the scope and form of such an inquiry?I thank the Taoiseach. I am aware of all of that work and, undoubtedly, it marks progress. I discussed these matters when I met the Garda Commissioner, Drew Harris, some months ago. However, I am now making a different proposition and a different point to the Taoiseach. Rather than proceeding in an  or discretionary way, we should establish multi-agency review processes of these types of homicides in law. This would allow an avenue for families, friends and each of the statutory organisations not just to share and reveal information but to learn. To return to my initial point, Clodagh and her three boys are gone. Others have also died in this horrific way. It is our job as legislators and it is the duty of statutory agencies not simply to be horrified, although we are all horrified by this turn of events, but to try to grasp why it happened so that we can take preventative action. The family have asked for an inquiry. They have not specified a particular type of inquiry. Can I suggest that rather than simply indicating a willingness to receive a submission, the Minister should meet the family in these circumstances and hear their questions directly? He should hear from them what a short, sharp informative inquiry should look like to give these families the comfort that I know we all wish for them to have.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-02-26	---	2	"Táim buíoch as an deis labhairt ar an mBille seo anocht. Since the Brexit referendum result became clear in June 2016, we, in Sinn Féin, have been steadfast in stating Brexit presents the most serious social, economic and political challenges to the island in a generation. That is the reality of the current situation. Brexit presents a massive challenge, one that demands a thoughtful, purposeful and robust response. The withdrawal agreement between the European Union and Britain that is on the table and the backstop contained within it are that response, which by no means is perfect. In fact, it is the bare minimum required to protect in the short term the Good Friday Agreement and ensure some safeguarding of our economic interests. It is a legally binding guarantee that ensures there will be no return to a hard border on the island and that the interests of citizens in the North, the majority of whom voted against Brexit, will be protected. However, it falls short on the promise that the rights of citizens in the North would be protected. I refer to the rights and protections afforded to other Irish citizens living in the European Union being extended to citizens in the North. We already see the assumption of the British system that all those who live in the North are British citizens. In their eyes, Irish citizens living in the North are foreigners in their own land.The Irish Government and the EU have much to do to ensure that the rights and entitlements of people in the North, including the right to political representation, are protected. To date the Government and the EU have failed to secure these rights. The legislation before us, the so-called omnibus Bill, does not deal with the long-term issues. No British Government should have the ability to set aside the wishes of the people in the North and impose Brexit. The Border is the problem, and as Brexit so amply demonstrates, this is not just an Irish problem. It is a European problem also. Unfortunately, a mere five weeks from Brexit the British Prime Minister continues to renege on the deal that she made. She has sought to play blink with the EU and demand changes that she cannot secure and which must not be conceded. Today the Brexit shambles continues at Westminster. The reality is that the backstop is required to protect our agreements and our economy. It is required to ensure there is no hard border. This is not simply the position of Sinn Féin, the Irish Government, the Irish State or, indeed, the EU. This was the position of Theresa May when she spoke to us before Christmas, yet she now says that it is not required or that it can be time-limited. Today she said it was her deal, no deal or further negotiation. All the while, uncertainty and instability grows.The time for stalling is over. There is a deal on the table, and the British Government and Parliament must now honour that agreement. There is a cohort of Brexiteers who do not deal in reality. They believe in Brexit at any cost, and if that cost is chaos in Ireland, a hard border and the ripping up of our agreements, so be it. That is their view. They do not want to be in the European Union. We know that much. They do not want a withdrawal agreement and they do not want a backstop. For them, Ireland is inconsequential. Our economy, our citizens and our agreements are collateral damage in their fight to recapture their imperial past. It is our job to ensure that does not happen.I share the view of the Tánaiste when he says we do not want to see this Bill enacted. What we want is a solution. We never wanted Brexit in the first place and we certainly do not want the chaos it will cause. That is why the people of the North rejected Brexit because they recognised the folly of one part of our island being inside the European Union and the other being outside. The consequences of that are now upon us. The British Prime Minster tells us she wants a deal but she already has a deal. Today she told us that Parliament will decide if there is to be no deal. She is the Prime Minister who has refused to rule out no deal. She is now telling us she may seek an extension to Article 50 while also saying that an extension will not resolve anything. That is why we must prepare for the worst-case scenario. That is why we must face up to the prospect that in a couple of weeks we could be in a no-deal situation, despite the wishes of the people of this island, North and South.It is an outrageous proposition that nobody here wants, but it is being foisted on us by those who do not care one iota for Ireland, our interests or our people. Shamefully that cohort includes the DUP. That party knows that a hard Brexit will damage this island, but its members are content with that situation because in their view the return of a hard border is the acceptable cost of the union with Britain. They are wrong. The DUP does not represent the view of a majority of citizens in the North. They got it wrong during the referendum debate, they were wrong in its aftermath and they are now very wrong about the withdrawal agreement and the backstop. It is disappointing and in fact disturbing that the DUP has sought to take the side of Tory Brexiteers and the likes of UKIP over the needs and aspirations of citizens in the North and across the island. However, that is their decision. Their decision is to be reckless and irresponsible. The truth is that ordinary citizens in the North, whether they are republicans, nationalists, unionists or otherwise, recognise that Brexit is not good and they want a deal that protects their livelihoods and their futures.Sinn Féin speaks for all communities on this, not for narrow interests. We have brought our view to Europe, to the Irish Government and to the British Government consistently over the last year and a half and more. When we first articulated a policy of special status for Ireland and for the North, some of the parties in this Dáil accused us of grandstanding. They told us it was unrealistic. Yet it has since become the agreed EU position in negotiations. I believe we had a huge impact in that regard.I have made the point here before that Brexit is not a temporary thing. It has consequences that are very real, lasting and enduring. They are for keeps. To combat those, we need a solution to match. Sinn Féin will be supporting the Bill before us tonight. We believe it can and should be strengthened and we will bring forward amendments to that effect. However, I must state clearly that the Bill before us is not the catch-all solution to a no-deal scenario that the Government has sought to portray it as. It is in fact just one of the multifaceted responses that are required and which must be adopted as a matter of urgency by all of us here in this Dáil.The Bill deals with some of the things that will impact immediately on people’s daily lives in the event of a no-deal Brexit, things like access to healthcare, cross-Border travel, access to education and pension entitlements. Dealing with these matters is absolutely necessary and nobody here could argue against ensuring that the contingency measures in this Bill are put in place and are ready, if required, though hopefully never needed. That is a reasonable proposition and one which we wholeheartedly support. Where we may differ with the Government, although I hope this is not the case, is with regard to what else is required in the event of a no-deal scenario. Much more is required. In addition to dealing with what the Bill before us does, we need to look at the bigger picture. While this Bill deals with important day-to-day matters it does not address the very real economic consequences of a crash-out Brexit or the prospect of the imposition of a hard border on our island.Our country in its entirety will be the country most affected by Brexit apart from Britain itself. That will be felt in ways that are out of proportion to anything that might be experienced by other countries in the European Union. That is why we need, and why we in Sinn Féin have compiled and called for, a comprehensive medium-term plan for dealing with the economic impact of a no-deal Brexit. The first part of that must be to mitigate the effects of Brexit in the very short term through legislative measures, some of which are dealt with in the Bill before us. The next part of the strategy must be to ensure that we overcome the disruption of Brexit through medium-term investment in capital and social infrastructure. That is why we have proposed the development of a €2 billion Brexit stabilisation fund. This should be put in place to complement, not to substitute for, any EU supports that are forthcoming in the event of a no-deal Brexit. We need supports for small and medium-sized enterprises, SMEs, in vulnerable sectors as well as targeted capital investment in our ports, roads and airports and in housing, health, and education. Enterprise Ireland has said that up to 25,000 jobs could be lost in a no-deal scenario. This would be catastrophic and we need a plan on the shelf for that prospect.There is a need for direct Government support for those importers and exporters that trade exclusively with Britain.The majority of these businesses are small to medium-sized enterprises and lack the scale of resources to easily change practices that have been so many years in the making. That means taking on board the concerns of stakeholders, mitigating, where possible, the effects of Brexit and investing in the future to overcome the structural changes in supply and trade that Brexit will bring.We must also accept that Brexit does not just affect businesses. It affects communities and people as well, and any Brexit strategy worth its salt needs to reflect and address that reality. That must be put in place without delay.As I said, there is a gap in this legislation. It fails to address the fundamental issue at the heart of the current crisis - partition. The third and most crucial aspect of our contingency planning must be to look to the future and to the constitutional arrangements on this island. I have made the case on numerous occasions, and I will do so again, that in the event of a no-deal scenario it is absolutely incumbent on the British Government to put the constitutional future of the North to the people in a referendum on Irish unity because if the people of the North are to be disregarded, then the people of the North must have their say in respect of their future. In a series of polls, a majority in the North have indicated that in a no-deal scenario, they would vote for a united Ireland. Similar polls indicate likewise here in the South.It is now time for the Government to heed those views from across the island and to indicate clearly that it, too, wants to see a referendum being held in the event of a no-deal situation. It is a more than reasonable position and one which all parties here should support. It makes perfect sense because the European Council agreed in April 2017 that the whole of our island would be afforded membership of the EU in the event of national reunification. That is what all of us here should be working towards.It seems some parties here have a problem with that view. I have to say I do not understand that position because these are the same parties which are quite content to talk up their united Irelander credentials when it suits them but talk down the prospect of unity when they think it is politically expedient to do so. I believe their position is the wrong position.I am talking chiefly, although not exclusively, about the shameful position of Fianna Fáil on this matter. It is now almost two years since Fianna Fáil promised it would ""within months"" publish a roadmap to a united Ireland. We are two years on. There is no plan. There is no roadmap, only the word ""No"". Its hypocrisy is laid bare for all to see. We are told that now is not the time to be talking about a unity referendum due to Brexit but now is absolutely the right time to be talking about unity as the undemocratic nature of partition is clear for all to see. Never again can a British Government seek to impose its will on the people of Ireland. Those days are over.The leader of the SDLP, or should I call him the Fianna Fáil leader in the North, Colum Eastwood, said at the weekend that there is ""a place in hell"" for those advocating for a Border poll without a plan. Someone should have told Colum how Fianna Fáil has rejected proposals for a cross-party group to create such a plan for unity. It will have another chance because we in Sinn Féin will bring forward amendments to this Bill calling on the Government to convene an all-Ireland forum on unity and for the Government to develop a White Paper on Irish unity. Now is the time to talk about unity, to plan for unity and to secure and win unity polls, North and South. I trust the leader of Fianna Fáil and the Taoiseach will support these measures and essential amendments to ensure there can be no Border on our island.The leader of Fianna Fáil also raised the issue of the institutions in the North. It is absolutely regrettable that the North's political institutions are down during the Brexit process, but that is the reality we face. It is a disgrace that the Executive is not meeting but while the leader of Fianna Fáil hurled from the ditch, Sinn Féin sought and secured a deal with the DUP, a deal that the DUP subsequently walked away from. A year later, it has not walked back into the talks.I would remind the Fianna Fáil leader that it was his northern sub contractors that first walked out of the Executive.The SDLP walked away from its responsibilities while the late Martin McGuinness did all the heavy lifting.That is the truth. The Fianna Fáil leader’s position is not surprising given the diatribe he greets us with here on a regular basis. Throwing shapes and offering a running commentary on issues of the day are no substitute for political positions and principles, so I suppose the current leadership of the SDLP and Fianna Fáil are very well matched.The prospect of a hard border would still be on us, as it is now, even if the institutions were in place. That is a fact. That is why we must not deal in the hypothetical but with the reality before us that we face the prospect of the introduction of a hard border on this island in a matter of weeks if there is no deal.The Tánaiste and the Taoiseach have dodged this issue time and again. I appreciate fully that they do not want to be seen as the Government that reintroduced a hard border on this island but that is what will happen if nothing is done because that is what the European Union rule book dictates, and we cannot allow that to happen. That is why, in the event of a no-deal situation, the Government must immediately begin preparing for a referendum on Irish unity, preparations it should be undertaking in any event.The only way to ensure there is never again a hard border on our island is to remove the Border for once and for all. It is the common-sense, durable answer to a no-deal scenario and an absolutely essential component of the Government’s contingency planning.Should we have this evening’s Bill? Yes. Should we have an investment programme and emergency EU funding for vulnerable sectors? Absolutely. Should we have a unity referendum in the event of a no-deal scenario? Most definitely, because the ultimate backstop for citizens in the absence of a withdrawal agreement is the Good Friday Agreement and if a no-deal situation transpires come 29 March, then we need, as per the Good Friday Agreement, a referendum on Irish unity. That must happen and we must now prepare to plan to end partition and to remove the Border, the dilemma of the Border and the jeopardy of the Border from our island for once and for all."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-02-20	---	1	"This morning it was revealed, through the excellent work of ""RTÉ Investigates"", that nearly 60 families in the west have been issued apologies by the HSE as a result of failings in audiology services provided or not provided to their children. This is not the first time this issue has arisen. Last year, the HSE issued apologies to 49 children in the same region as a result of failings related to paediatric audiology services. At that time, and now, some of the children affected were left with lifelong impairments as a result of the failings of our health service.The Taoiseach may have heard the story on ""Morning Ireland"" this morning of 11 year old James from Mayo. His parents were entirely unaware of his hearing impairment until they received a letter from the HSE in recent weeks apologising for the lack of care. Six years ago, James was in junior infants and his parents were reassured that his hearing was fine. He is now in fifth class and in the intervening period, he has had no treatment for his hearing impairment. We can only begin to imagine the impact that that has had on the child, socially, developmentally and educationally. It is shocking. I understand that there is now a look-back review into paediatric audiology services. This is the second such look-back review. At this stage, the parents and families in question have received no indication of how long this process will take to complete and, in any event, they have lost faith in it. They now require an independent inquiry and investigation into this mess. Will the Taoiseach agree to that? It is clear that our health services are failing all of us and our children.Figures provided to my colleague, Teachta Louise O'Reilly, show the disgraceful delays for children in accessing speech and language therapy and occupational therapy. These waiting lists not only impact on children's lives in the here and now, but they have future implications too. Some of the worst delays for occupational therapy are in Mayo, where there are 138 children under five who have been waiting for more than a year for basic treatment. In Cavan-Monaghan, 523 children are on a waiting list. In Cork, 679 kids over five face delays for care. The window of opportunity for these therapies is short and the significant delays cause additional problems for children in the future and as adults. Will the Taoiseach agree to the inquiry as called for by the parents of James and others? Who is accountable for these waiting lists and delays for our children? Who is answerable? Is anybody answerable for this?I could have added failures relating to autism services to the list that I presented. Cases have come before the courts because of the HSE's consistent failure to comply with the law. The Disability Act provides for children to be assessed within a tight timeframe so that tailored treatment can be identified and started but, yet again, there is delay after delay. Parents are now moved to go to the courts to seek some level of accountability. Open disclosure is very necessary and welcome but there has to be accountability too. Who is responsible for this mess?Every day, it becomes more and more apparent that the health services are in a crisis and there is a lack of leadership and direction. Deputy Micheál Martin himself spoke this morning about obfuscation. He has raised questions over the truthfulness of accounts given by the Minister for Health on CervicalCheck and the additional smear. Fianna Fáil is nonetheless happy to allow a Minister and Government to evade accountability for the many failures in our services. I have raised specific services where children are being let down today and will be let down tomorrow. Their parents are being misled and fear that their children will be affected now and in the future. I asked the Taoiseach who is responsible for this and I want an answer. Who will be held accountable?Who employed them?The Minister will be.The Minister employed them."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-02-20	---	2	Ar mo shon féin agus ar son Shinn Féin ba mhaith liom comhbhrón a dhéanamh le clann agus cairde an iar-Theachta Donal Creed a fuair bás i Mí na Samhna 2017. On my behalf and on behalf of Sinn Féin, I would like to extend sincere sympathies to the family and friends of former Teachta Donal Creed, who passed away in November 2017. I believe Deputy Micheál Martin made reference to 2,000 grandchildren, which caused a bit of alarm of these benches. Perhaps he meant two dozen. I salute not only Donal's political prowess but his wonderful tribe of a family from the rebel county.Bhí gairm fada ag Donal in oifig phoiblí agus táim cinnte go bhfuil a mhuintir an-bhródúil as sin. Donal had a very distinguished career as a public representative, serving in this House from 1965 to 1989, representing the fine people of mid-Cork and Cork North-West. He was among the first Irish Members of the European Parliament, from 1973 to 1977, and served as a Minister of State in various Departments for a total of five years under the then Taoiseach, Garret FitzGerald.I did not know Donal and I never met him, but the mother of one of our members of staff did. He wished for me, on his behalf and on behalf of his mother and family, to let it be known that they will forever be indebted to Donal for assistance that was given to them more than 30 years ago. That, more than anything, is the mark of not just a great public representative but a great person. He was accessible and humble, and was a true servant of the people.I join with everybody in extending our sympathy and condolences to Madeleine, her family and friends, and of course to our colleague, Michael. I am absolutely certain that his father is immensely proud of his service as a member of Cabinet. I also extend sympathies to all of Donal's colleagues in Fine Gael. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam dílis.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-02-20	---	3	The programme for Government commits to introducing measures to ensure the more efficient and timely recruitment of nurses. However, the HSE continues to pay hundreds of millions of euro in employing temporary agency staff. Last year saw the largest increase in spending on agency staff since 2014, up €26 million to a staggering €318 million. Since 2011, when Fine Gael took office, the Government has spent almost €2 billion on temporary staff to fill gaps in staffing because it has continuously failed to address the recruitment and retention crisis. Agency staff were originally intended to plug temporary and short-term gaps in rostering, but the figures prove that, far from being temporary, there is now a reliance on agency staff in the health service. Some hospitals' dependency on agency staff is significant. There is a figure of €9 million at Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital, Drogheda; €10 million at the Midland Regional Hospital, Portlaoise; and €11 million at University Hospital Limerick.The Minister cannot plead ignorance or shirk blame. What plan is in place to end this misuse of taxpayers' money?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-02-19	---	1	Under the watch of the Taoiseach, the Minister, Deputy Harris, has led our health service into a state of absolute crisis. In recent weeks, nurses and midwives were forced to engage in strike action because their legitimate and correct concerns in respect of the recruitment and retention crisis were ignored by the Taoiseach and his Government. GPs have protested outside Leinster House at the Government's failure to invest adequately in primary care. Hospital waiting lists have continued to grow, and last week reached new record levels, with more than 523,000 patients now waiting for an outpatient consultation and over 72,000 waiting for an inpatient procedure.That is absolutely scandalous. The trolley crisis continues unabated. Today there are 512 patients on trolleys in hospitals throughout the State. Despite this, only half of the additional beds promised in the HSE's winter plan have been opened, which is absolute madness. Last week we learned that women who had availed of a smear test following the CervicalCheck scandal last year were waiting up to six months to get the test results. To top it all off, we have the calamity surrounding the cost overrun – I heard the Taoiseach today spinning it as a cost underestimation - on the national children's hospital project. It is going to have a serious knock-on effect in the delivery of other health projects throughout the State. For example, in Limerick the provision of a new 60-bed ward block at University Hospital Limerick is the latest project to face the axe, despite the fact that University Hospital Limerick is consistently one of the hospitals worst affected by overcrowding in the State. This is a serious blow to people across the mid-west region and, quite frankly, unforgivable.In that regard, I acknowledge the announcement this morning by the Chairman of the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Health, An Teachta Harty, that he would support Sinn Féin's motion of no confidencein the Minister for Health tomorrow evening. That is significant and I am sure An Teachta Harty has not taken the decision lightly. I am sure he has arrived at the conclusion, with the rest of us, that something has to be done because we cannot tolerate the health service in this crisis. The Taoiseach's friends in Fianna Fáil who, as he says, spin yarns may well be prepared to stand aside, allow the  to prevail and allow an incompetent Minister to remain in office, but we will not. Deputy Micheál Martin and Fianna Fáil will have the opportunity to put up or shut up tomorrow evening in that regard.In the meantime, it is incumbent on the Taoiseach to make clear which specific projects are being axed as a result of the overrun on the national children's hospital project in the health service and elsewhere, including flood defences. Across the State people have a right to receive accurate information from the Taoiseach.It is the Taoiseach himself who is spinning the yarns but he is not on his own. I understand the Minister for Health is attempting to spin a line that there is nothing to see here and that the cost overruns, or the cost underestimations, as the Taoiseach put them, were really no big deal. He seems to imagine that there is a magic money tree somewhere from which he can draw resources.He seems to be in line-----The Members on the Fine Gael benches need to accept that any claims they may have made to fiscal prudence, to minding the house and to watching the taxpayers' purse have been well and truly blown out of the water at this stage. Can the Taoiseach guarantee that the 60-bed modular ward for Limerick will be delivered on time? Can he give us a precise timeline because the view among people in Limerick is that this project has been axed, or certainly that they will not see delivery on time.I am afraid the Ceann Comhairle might save that remark for his Fianna Fáil colleagues as well.He might look towards them also.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-02-12	---	1	There are three extraordinary facts at the heart of this fiasco. The first is the extraordinary achievement of delivering what we are advised will be the world's most expensive hospital, ever, at an overrun to the taxpayer of €450 million. This is extraordinary stuff. Second, it is extraordinary to hear the Taoiseach again try to justify or explain away this fiasco, as if to suggest to the taxpayer that it is not such a big deal after all, that is, €450 million of taxpayers' money in any overspend. Perhaps, what is most extraordinary in this scenario is to hear the Government's coalition partner, Deputy Micheál Martin, extol the extraordinariness of the situation and then resolve to back the Government and its incompetent Minister for Health, Deputy Harris. This is truly extraordinary stuff.It is extraordinary that the Tánaiste and other members of Government choose to label efforts to seek accountability as stunts. It is extraordinary that the Cabinet and Government are so arrogant at this stage that they defy the prerogative and duty of the Opposition to hold them to account because that is a democratic imperative and it is essential. It is essential because of this hospital overrun but it would be necessary in any event because the Minister for Health's record, frankly, is shambolic. Whatever the Taoiseach may think, or whatever his friend, Deputy Micheál Martin, might suggest we have a crisis in the health service. It is crystal clear at this juncture that the Minister for Health is incapable of resolving it. In fact, it has become apparent that he is part of the problem and not part of the solution.We have the worst waiting lists across Europe. Last month, more than 10,000 patients were on hospital trolleys. Last year was the worst year on record in a perpetual trolley crisis that nobody seems to be accountable for. It is a farce. We had nurses and midwives on picket lines, which was totally avoidable but for the overbearing arrogance of this Government and the Minister for Health, who would only at the eleventh hour engage respectfully with our nurses and midwives. Then, we have the small matter of €450 million of taxpayers' money. Fianna Fáil might be prepared to sit on its hands but we will not. The anger around all this debacle is very real and it will not go away. I understand that the Minister for Health, Deputy Harris, proposes to make a brief statement following Leaders' Questions, with no facility for questions or answers or even the most basic accountability. I suggest to the Taoiseach that rather than facilitating this fiasco any further he should do the right thing and relieve the Minister for Health, Deputy Harris, of his duties.Just so that I have the record of the Dáil straight, it is the most expensive hospital per bed. I reckon that still makes it the most expensive hospital but I will not quibble with the Taoiseach over that. It is not just that there was a miscalculation of the costs. That happened for sure and there are governance issues that percolate all the way down through the board reappointed by the Minister in July 2018. No doubt, we will uncover the individual actions, inaction and bad calls that were made.However, it is not just about that and the Taoiseach knows that. The Minister had information that we are advised he did not share with his Cabinet colleagues. The Minister had information that we are advised he did not share with his colleagues in government, in Fianna Fáil. In fact, Fianna Fáil had extensive pre-budget negotiations. Reviewing the confidence and supply arrangement was a very long process during which we were told an in-depth review of every Department took place yet Fianna Fáil was not informed about this or it missed it.This is not simply about incompetence and bad management, which the Government has demonstrated previously. It is also about concealing or failure to reveal the full facts. The facts are that whatever the mood on the Government benches is, the people do not accept that an apology from the Minister is sufficient and will not tolerate a Government that is an apologist for bad governance rather than one that is prepared to face real accountability.Jesus.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-02-07	---	1	We all accept the scale of the commission's task in investigating this shameful chapter in the State’s past. The need to investigate mother and baby homes and the provision of redress to survivors have been debated in the Chamber for the past 15 years. In 2005, my colleague, Deputy Ó Caoláin, called on the Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform to include mother and baby homes in the work of the Ryan commission. Members of the Opposition in the Dáil and Seanad repeatedly called on Governments led by Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael to recognise the wrongs endured by the women and children who passed through the doors of the institutions but their demands fell on deaf ears.The Minister's recent apology to survivors for the further delay to the commission completing its work was welcome, for what it was worth. I accept the sincerity of her belief that by granting an extension of 12 months, the final report will provide a better picture of what happened in the institutions. Unfortunately, however, the Minister's sentiments are not matched by her Department's actions. I was alarmed to learn that it took two full years for her Department and the Department of Health to hand over the first tranche of discovery to the commission. Even after such an inexplicable delay, the material provided by both Departments was just one tenth of the documentation that would follow over the next year and a half. As late as November 2018, the commission was informed of many thousands of pages of discovery yet to be handed over.While that is bad, the HSE has fared even worse. It has been unable to provide documentation of its involvement in institutions from as recently as 2006, as Deputy Mitchell noted. The fourth interim report indicates that the commission is dismayed that so little relevant documentation has been found by the HSE. It also reveals that the HSE does not have a system for storing or archiving material. How can it be that any State agency in 2019 does not have an archiving policy and procedure embedded in all levels of its administration function? As an aside, it is reminiscent of the behaviour of state authorities north of the Border, which seek to hide information from families seeking the truth about legacy inquests and past events.Many survivors and families simply no longer have confidence in the Government or the State to do the right thing. It is as stark as that. They fear that the Government is dragging its heels in a cynical attempt to limit the State’s redress liabilities to a small group of survivors whose numbers decline with each passing year.I make particular reference, as the Minister did, to the survivors of the Bethany Home. As she will know, detailed research undertaken by Dr. Niall Meehan on behalf of the survivors provides a catalogue of State culpability dating as far back as 1939. Let us not forget that statutory inspections of maternity homes began in 1934, and the Bethany Home was inspected from 1935. Just four years later, the State’s deputy chief medical adviser ignored the advice of a departmental inspector who wanted a Bethany Home nurse mother to be prosecuted for severe neglect. At least 247 children died in the institution. Some 222 of those babies and children have been memorialised by survivors in Mount Jerome Cemetery, and it is possible that more died. Children were routinely shipped out to unsuitable homes in Ireland and further afield. We know that at least 54 of those children died from convulsions, 41 from heart failure and 26 from malnutrition or starvation. In 2017, by examining the records of undertakers, the group discovered 25 additional children, many of whom also died from malnutrition.Mr. Derek Leinster, arguably the leader of the group, has outlined his heartbreaking story of abuse and neglect, as are those stories of survivors who have since passed away without justice or redress. In 2016, the commission stated in its second interim report that, logically, children resident at the Bethany Home and similar homes should be eligible for the residential institutions redress scheme. I cannot for the life of me understand why the Minister has not taken it upon herself to champion that cause. I do not accept her blithely setting the matter aside and telling us that the Government position remains the same.On Tuam, which the Minister mentioned, if legislation is needed for the gathering of DNA, let us have it promptly. We must listen to victims and survivors.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-02-05	---	1	The very fact that nurses and midwives are engaged again today in industrial action is a reflection of the Taoiseach's incompetence. The failure of his Government to address the recruitment and retention crisis now gripping the health service and his inability to grasp this issue has led to a national crisis. It is not good for taxpayers that nurses and midwives are on picket lines. Has that occurred to the Taoiseach? It is not good for citizens or anyone who relies on the services of the HSE, and it is certainly not good for the nurses and midwives themselves. I spoke to many of them this morning at Holles Street and St. James's Hospital. I was there to demonstrate solidarity, but more importantly to listen to what they have to say. None of them wanted to be on the picket line. They are very angry and upset, but they are very determined. They want to be back at work and doing what they do best, which is caring for their patients. We all agree that they are, after all, the backbone of the health service. They work in very difficult and stressful circumstances and conditions. The reality, no matter how the Taoiseach tries to spin it, is that their pay and working conditions have given rise to a recruitment and retention crisis within the system.I spoke to one midwife this morning who gave an example of just how broken the system is. She works in Holles Street. On one particular day she was the only midwife on a ward of 12 women. There was a woman there who had just had a C-section who needed help.The woman was in discomfort. The midwife told the story that the woman would not press the bell or look for the midwife's attention because she could see just how stressed the midwife was and just how chaotic the scene was. What kind of service is it when someone in need of assistance feels moved not to ask for help when lying in a hospital ward? It is unacceptable.The Government's so-called approach to the unions was not only discourteous; it was also disrespectful, utterly inept and had all of the hallmarks of its mishandling of this scenario to date. The Taoiseach has now conceded on the need for engagement and that is a start. What he now needs to understand are the parameters of that engagement. They must include no preconditions, direct engagement by the Taoiseach as Head of Government and direct engagement with the nurses, midwives and their unions. Nothing short of this is going to work. If the Taoiseach is interested in resolving this dispute in the public interest, he will engage directly and with no preconditions; he will step into the breach as Head of Government and respectfully listen to the proposals coming from the nurses and their representatives and weigh them up. Then, if he is wise, he will act on them.We are two days in and there are seven days to go, but all the Taoiseach has to offer is robotic monologues. Nothing he has said has within it the seeds of resolving the dispute. What can resolve it, as we have said to the Taoiseach consistently, is positive respectful direct engagement. That means engagement with no threats or sabre rattling on pensions or pay, engagement with no preconditions, engagement not to carve up a special deal but such that nurses and their representative bodies will believe the dispute can be resolved within the strictures of the current public pay agreement.I have said this to the Taoiseach several times in the Dáil. The nursing unions have said this to him publicly. I have no doubt that anyone with an ounce of wit would give the Taoiseach the same advice privately, yet he was unwilling, as Head of Government, to make the very necessary move. We are two days down and seven days of further action are planned. If this strike continues, the fault lies with the Taoiseach. The blame lies with his spectacular inertia and refusal to act.I beg to differ on that.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-01-30	---	1	The reason nurses and midwives are on picket lines today is the Taoiseach's failures. I refer to his inaction and absolute failure not just in regard to the pay issue but the recruitment and retention crisis associated with it. I stopped to stand on picket lines with nurses and midwives this morning on my way to work. I was at Temple Street, the Rotunda and the Mater hospitals. Nobody to whom I spoke this morning wanted to be on strike; in fact, it is the very last thing they want. They are upset and angry. They want to be at work and they are aware better than anyone else of the stresses and strains their hospitals are under. However, they are resolute. They feel they have been failed and let down, they have not been listened to and they have been backed into a corner and, therefore, they have taken the action of last resort, which is to strike.They reject the Taoiseach's reaching for the Brexit excuse. In fact, that made them more angry. I suspect when they hear that the Minister for Health, Deputy Harris, is also running for cover behind Brexit, they will be even more deeply angered. As the Taoiseach noted, they have broad support from the public and there is a reason for that. People recognise the quality of care delivered by staff who are underpaid in unbelievably difficult circumstances, particularly in emergency departments but not only there. They are astonished that the Taoiseach, above all people, because he is a medical doctor, does not grasp or get this. They are annoyed that he is sitting on the sidelines. He is acting as a commentator, a dispassionate observer of events. He is in charge, he is the Head of Government, he is the employer, and he has a duty not to pass the buck on this issue and to intervene.Nurses and midwives are not looking for a special deal. They are not looking for condescension and to be told to wrap up warm and well. They are not looking for sympathy. They are not looking for tears. They are not looking for praise. They are looking for a just and fair settlement. They believe that it can be achieved within the scope of the current pay agreement. That is their view. What they want the Taoiseach to do, as Head of Government, is to come off the sidelines and to engage.I assume that he accepts that there is a recruitment and retention crisis in nursing. That is a fact. The figures on agency nursing tell us part of that story. I also assume that he accepts that nurses, who are incredibly well qualified, deserve to be well paid, and not insulted by being treated almost as second-class employees within the system. He has accepted that those workers are resolute in their position and that they will not back down.I invite the Taoiseach, therefore, to take the next logical step, and commit to directly and personally intervene and engage. I ask that of him today as Head of Government.Are the pictures of our young nurses in Melbourne and Sydney and all around the globe asking the Taoiseach to give them a reason to come home fake news? If he will pardon the pun, are they doctored images? I do not believe that they are. People know that certain nursing staff go abroad for a year but then they come back but the reality now is that we are losing so many of our best and brightest and they are not coming back.I refer to another fact. There is a strike on today. How is that for a fact? As the Taoiseach acknowledged, procedures have been cancelled. How is that for a fact? Should any of us or our loved ones get sick, every man, woman and child in this land want the best of care for them. All of us know that is only possible if one has the right staff and one will only have the right staff if they are treated with dignity and they are paid and rewarded at an appropriate level. How are those for facts?What nurses and midwives want is very reasonable. I know all about the industrial relations mechanisms of the State. The Taoiseach does not have to keep repeating that to us as though we are morons. We are all well acquainted with and well versed in all of that. I do not accept that it is satisfactory or acceptable for him to passively sit on the sidelines while this strike is on.I speak on behalf of the nurses and midwives I spoke to this morning who asked me to tell the Taoiseach to engage. Deputy Varadkar is their Taoiseach and Head of Government. They are asking him to engage. If he is interested in sorting this dispute, that is what he will do, and he will do it speedily.I thank the Taoiseach.We know what they are. I thank the Taoiseach.The nurses are on strike.But there is a strike.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-01-30	---	2	The programme for Government states that the Taoiseach will end the need for rough sleeping by providing a high level of funding for the homeless services that support emergency beds and accommodation options. Yesterday, the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government stated that in light of the cold snap we are experiencing, there will be places in emergency accommodation for all those who need them. I want to bring to the Taoiseach's attention, therefore, some information that came my way from Inner City Helping Homeless, which reports that outreach volunteers found that there were no beds available by 11.30 p.m. last night for people who wanted them and that 86 people slept rough in Dublin as a result. Not alone that, people have contacted my office this morning to state that those who were in hostels last night were turfed out into the cold first thing this morning and are now sitting around in tents near Heuston Station. I am sure the Taoiseach will agree that this is unacceptable. Can he move immediately to ensure that there will be beds available for those who need them and that those who need that accommodation will not be turfed out at first light into freezing conditions?Is my figure wrong?They are out at Heuston Station in tents.The Government is not being fair to any of them.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-01-29	---	1	Déanaim comhbhrón le muintir an cheathrair óig a fuair bás i dTír Chonaill ag an deireadh seachtaine. I want to join the Taoiseach and on behalf of Sinn Féin, to extend sincere and heartfelt sympathy to the families and friends of the four young men who lost their lives in west Donegal at the weekend and to all who have lost their lives on our roads. Our thoughts are with all of those affected. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a n-anamacha.I am struck by the very  approach the Taoiseach is taking to the fact that in less than 24 hours, members of the INMO are due to commence industrial action in the first of a number of 24-hour stoppages over the coming weeks and his detachment from the fact that members of the PNA will also engage in industrial action. I am sure he knows, as I do, that strike action is the very last thing nurses or midwives, or any medical professional for that matter, wish to undertake but, regrettably, nurses and midwives have been backed into a corner and forced to engage in industrial action because of the action, or inaction, of the Government.Every day, every week, as the Taoiseach will be well aware, procedures are cancelled across our hospitals. That is due not least to the recruitment and retention crisis affecting the nursing and midwifery professions, and the associated issue of pay is one of the most significant problems affecting the health service. It has been an ongoing issue for many years, yet the Government has completely and abjectly failed to address this and the situation has deteriorated. The Taoiseach cannot pretend that this is an issue that takes him by surprise.Nurses, midwives and their unions have continually sought meaningful engagement to address the problem of staffing shortages as well as pay issues but he has brushed their concerns aside. It is our nurses and midwives who have acted in a responsible and mature manner. For his part, the Taoiseach has decided to disengage. Nurses make a significant contribution to the health service and to society. They deserve - and I have absolutely no doubt will enjoy - our full support in their demand for a better health service. Last April, we passed a motion in this House, which demanded that the Government engage meaningfully with the unions to draw a roadmap to full pay equality with an implementation plan to deliver same within a short timeframe, not the eight years that it has offered up.At the 11th hour, with thousands of surgeries cancelled and with strike action due to commence in the morning, will the Taoiseach do as the nursing unions have asked and directly intervene? Will he intervene as a matter of urgency? Will he listen to what the nurses and their unions are telling him? They believe that this dispute can be resolved within the strictures and the conditions of the pay agreement. They want the Taoiseach, as the employer and as the Head of Government, to intervene, stop sitting on the sidelines, get involved and sort this out.Listening to the Taoiseach, one would never think this is the Government presiding over the construction of the most expensive hospital in the world, one would never think this is the Government presiding over €1.2 million of expenditure every week on agency nursing, a figure that is rising and will continue to rise, and one would never think the Taoiseach is the Head of the Government that has been comfortable with pay rises for politicians and gold-plated pensions. I could go on and on.It is a new low for the Taoiseach to reach for Brexit to explain away his dereliction of duty and failure in respect of our nurses and midwives. Brexit is not of their making. Brexit or no Brexit, people need top quality health services. Brexit or no Brexit, people need their surgical procedures, outpatient appointments and so on. Brexit or no Brexit, we need to deal with these issues. Brexit or no Brexit, the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, ought to intervene directly, as the nursing unions have asked him to do, to find a fair and meaningful settlement for our nurses and midwives. I am very well aware of and familiar with the industrial relations apparatus of the State and guess what? The nurses and the midwives are too. They are also aware that the buck stops with the Taoiseach because he is the person in charge. He is the Head of Government. It is unacceptable for him to sit on the sidelines in circumstances where he knows that their pay claim is just and justifiable, and must be resolved.It is unacceptable for him to sit on his hands on the sidelines and do nothing. I put the question to him again: what does he propose to do as Taoiseach to intervene now, albeit at the 11th hour, to sort this matter out, and not just to try to avert the strike action tomorrow but the strike actions that will surely follow in the weeks and months ahead?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-01-23	---	1	"The projected cost overrun in respect of the national children's hospital is, at best, a fiasco and, at worst, an example of gross incompetence on the part of the Government and those overseeing the project. What is most worrying is that, despite the fact that this overrun is set to blow a hole in the capital budget for years to come, no one seems willing to take responsibility for it. The Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, whose function is to supervise Government procurement and public expenditure, has gone into hiding. Its Secretary General has refused to appear before the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Health to account for the Department's role in this process.On ""The Week in Politics"" at the weekend, the Chief Whip and Minister of State, Teachta Kyne, said that the position of the Secretary General was not sustainable. He was right. He offered up the view that the Comptroller and Auditor General could review the spiralling cost of the children's hospital. We in Sinn Féin welcomed that suggestion and were hopeful that such an investigation would be forthcoming, but lo and behold, a few hours after the suggestion was made, it was rebuffed by a Government spokesperson. It would seem that the Minister of State either misspoke or was slapped down. Which was it?There are serious issues to be examined. The original tender from BAM was €131 million lower than the next bid. Did anyone in government raise questions as to how the accepted tender could be delivered when others were indicating clearly that it would cost over €100 million more to deliver? Surely the Taoiseach will agree when I suggest that someone or a group of people have messed up seriously. Will he now act without hesitation and agree to a full public investigation into what has happened and who is responsible? This is serious stuff.The Government has committed to capital spending of €3 billion over the next four years. An overrun of more than €450 million will reduce that amount by up to 15% and will stop projects that have been provided for going ahead. That is the reality. There is significant concern in communities across the State about how the overspend will impact on them and on commitments made to fund badly needed projects. For example, what of the commitment for a new MRI scanner at the Midland Regional Hospital, Mullingar? What about the second cath lab at University Hospital Waterford? What about the Drimnagh primary care centre? I could go on.What projects will be cut because of this scandalous cost overrun? People want an answer to that question. Will the Taoiseach clarify whether he agrees with the Minister of State that the position of the Secretary General of the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform is not sustainable and that he should make himself available to answer questions?The Taoiseach need not convince anybody on the necessity of having a world-class children's hospital. God knows, people have waited long enough for it, but that is not the source of my questions. I am questioning the efficacy and effectiveness of the procurement procedures of the State. The Taoiseach should bear in mind that in the term of office of the previous Government his party made a virtue of the fact that it had overhauled procurement procedures to avoid precisely this type of scenario of cost inflation and potential wastage of expenditure by the State. It is for that reason that Mr. Watt needs to present himself to the Joint Committee on Health. I am well aware that Mr. Breslin is the Accounting Officer for the Department of Health, but I am with Deputy Kyne, the Government Chief Whip. I do not believe Mr. Watt's position is sustainable and see no good reason he should not present himself to the Joint Committee on Health. A review by PwC is all well and good, but it is not in government and running Departments. Where we need accountability for this cock up is among people in government and the senior civil servants who advise, guide and implement Government decisions. The Taoiseach is dancing on the head of a pin in saying matters are simply being deferred in respect of other spending. Neither people living in Waterford who are waiting for a second catheterisation laboratory, nor people living in the midlands or Drimnagh will welcome or feel in any way reassured by the Taoiseach's distinction between a cut and a deferral. Will he confirm for the House that he will make available a full and comprehensive list of deferred and re-profiled projects in order that people can make a decision for themselves?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-01-23	---	2	Next Wednesday, the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation, INMO, will commence industrial action, and the Psychiatric Nurses Association, PNA, is to follow in February. The Government sits on its hands. Last April, Sinn Féin introduced a motion to the Dáil that was agreed unanimously but the Government has refused to implement its recommendations. It called on the Government to work with unions to draw up a roadmap for full pay equality, with an implementation plan to deliver pay equality within a short timeframe, not the eight years the Government had in mind. Despite this, at the eleventh hour letters are being sent informing patients of cancelled surgeries. It is clear that the Government has failed comprehensively to tackle the recruitment and retention crisis. It refuses to accept pay is an issue and that this needs to be resolved. I ask the Taoiseach to ask the Minister for Health to appear before the Dáil to explain to its Members, who voted last April and set out a series of reasonable, thoughtful steps that the Government might take, why he has ignored the motion agreed by the Dáil and allowed this situation to escalate to the point of industrial action, which we are facing.There is a strike on Wednesday. Well done.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	debate	2019-01-23	---	3	Táim fíor-bhuíoch as an deis labhairt ar an mBille tábhachtach seo um thráthnóna. It is my privilege to support the Bill on behalf of Sinn Féin and I commend Senator Black on advancing it.I listened with a sinking heart to the Tánaiste's speech. He spoke about the centre of gravity as it pertained to Palestine. Let us assess the centre of gravity and the progress that has been made. The Palestinian people are victims of a process of colonisation and an onslaught of building of illegal settlements. Land is taken and rights are denied. People are imprisoned using a form of internment known as administrative detention, a British law that still stands. Their numbers include more than 400 children. Children have been maimed, with their eyes gone, thanks to Israeli defence forces aggression. Young men were jailed - actually, they were children - at the age of 12 years and released at the age of 15. A young woman aged 16 years, Ahed Tamimi, spent six months in jail for standing up to Israeli soldiers. Last year 312 Palestinians, including 53 children, died at the hands of the Israeli army. That is the centre of gravity.The Tánaiste dishonours this country and our international standing by taking to his feet in this Chamber and attempting to overlook, disregard or justify all of this. The Irish people are prepared to take on the argument at EU level. Public opinion understands this is necessary. People are prepared to take on the commercial complications set out by the Tánaiste. What they are not prepared to do and what no Government worthy of the name should do is stand over trade with illegal settlements or stand by as the state of Israel comprehensively and brazenly flouts international law day in and day out. Above all else, the Government and the State should stand for the rule of international law. In the final analysis, that is what the legislation is about. The Tánaiste can give his political, legal and diplomatic rationale and come up with every excuse under the sun not to support the Bill, but we only need one good reason to support it.I was in Palestine before Christmas. The Palestinian people look to Ireland to lead and stand in solidarity with them. They want this legislation. I did not meet one person who was opposed to it. As the Palestinian people believe this is the right move, let us make it and lead from the front. That is the honourable and Irish thing to do.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-01-22	---	1	"In response to the first question the Taoiseach said our most valuable citizens were children. I challenge him and the Government because it is very clear to me that on his watch children are not our most valued citizens. This morning Temple Street Children's University Hospital released the figure for the numbers of children who had presented at its emergency department last year and subsequently been discharged to no fixed address. Disgracefully, that number stood at 842. They are 842 of the most vulnerable citizens of the State and I suggest they are citizens who are not valued or considered. Not alone do they need medical care in emergency departments, they also need a home. Anyone who heard the lead emergency medicine consultant in Temple Street hospital on radio this morning could not but have been shocked. He said presentations were varied and complex but that in the majority of cases they stemmed from the fact that the children were living in completely unsuitable, cramped and temporary accommodation. Not alone are they left without a home, the State also sponsors a system in which they live - I repeat - in unsuitable, cramped and temporary accommodation. That is their reality.Of course, this is not just about numbers. If the figure from Temple Street hospital is 842 children, what is the position in every other hospital throughout the State? Is the Taoiseach able to tell the Dáil what the total number of children being discharged to no fixed abode throughout the land is? Is he able to reassure the Dáil that he understands the extent of the damage done to young lives that are destroyed before they even start, before many of them utter a word or learn their ABCs, or even before their first day at school? Most of them have never known any place called home. Instead they have known family hubs, hotel rooms and bed and breakfast accommodation, in which the mould on the walls and ceilings impacts on their ability to breathe, in which they live in cramped conditions and are scalded or burned, in which they are self-harming and in which children with cystic fibrosis, neurological disorders, autism and a disability grow up in cramped, unsuitable and dangerous accommodation.What about their parents? Let us have a thought for them. They expect to raise their children, as we all do, in a society that exhibits some semblance of decency and in a country that has some bottom line for how we treat children. I invite the Taoiseach to share with the Dáil the true figure. What is the figure throughout the State for the number of children who are discharged from hospital into homelessness? What does the Taoiseach have to say to them and their parents?None of us wishes to see these things happening but they are happening on the Taoiseach's watch. That is the bottom line. The Taoiseach is the Head of Government and he carries the can for this. Despite all his self-satisfied patter, the number of discharges of children from Temple Street Hospital into homelessness has gone up by 29% and not down. Homelessness has been normalised and that is why the Taoiseach can stand with a straight face and read a list of his avowed triumphs in lifting the yoke of poverty from child citizens.The Taoiseach actually buys into that. He has normalised child homelessness and it seems he makes no apology for that. The Taoiseach stated that he visited these family hubs. The key word is ""visited"". I do not think anybody in this Chamber would tolerate living in one of these family hubs or having their loved ones live there either. Has the Taoiseach visited the bed and breakfasts, the hostels or the hotel rooms? I can take him there. There are many of them in the north inner city where young parents struggle with small children. Never mind my contribution, listen to the doctors.I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. The medical expert who treats these children - not me - states their maladies and injuries stem from the fact that they live in completely unsuitable, cramped and temporary accommodation. The Taoiseach does not have the figures for the State as a whole. I invite him to get those figures----------and to present them, when he has them, to the Dáil. Rather than giving self-righteous patter----------I invite the Taoiseach to give words of reassurance as a response to these children and their parents.I am aware of that.The doctors in Temple Street do not say-----"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-01-16	---	1	Last night, as predicted, the Brexit withdrawal agreement negotiated between the British Government and the European Union was overwhelmingly rejected by the British Parliament. As was the case during the Brexit referendum debate, the vote last night again reflected an absolute disregard for the interests of Ireland and for the international obligations of the British State to honour and implement the Good Friday Agreement. Indeed, there is an unmissable hostility to Irish interests in some sections of the British political establishment. The level of Brexiteer delusion is perhaps best summed up by the commentary of the DUP leader, Ms Arlene Foster, when she claimed that we never had a hard border in Ireland. That is manifestly not true and it illustrates clearly that Brexiteers do not deal with reality. I am sure the Taoiseach does not need me to point out just how worrying that is because with every day that passes, we lurch closer to the possibility of a no-deal scenario and the return of that hard border.Yesterday, prior to the vote in Westminster, the Tánaiste briefed us on contingency plans in the event of this situation. These contingency plans focus on east-west matters, which are important to protect trade and commerce between our islands. The Tánaiste said that the legislation required to deal with these matters will not be published until 22 February. Sinn Féin will assist in crafting and passing all necessary legislation but the Government is coming to all of this very late in the day. The Government needs to revise that schedule and Members need to see the legislation before late February.The Tánaiste had nothing to say, however, on contingency planning to protect our all-island economy, citizens' rights and the Good Friday Agreement in the event of a crash Brexit. Last night, as has been said, the Tánaiste and Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport were at odds in respect of checks on goods crossing the Border in the event of a no-deal Brexit. The Minister, Deputy Ross, said that there would be checks but the Tánaiste said there would not. They cannot both be right. Who is right? Is it Deputy Ross or is it the Tánaiste? The reality is that in the absence of a backstop, there will be a hard border and there will be checks. The Taoiseach has skated around this issue time and again. Is it not now time to say out loud that in the absence of a deal, there will be a hard border and to reassert that this is an unacceptable, indeed, an unconscionable situation for us? It is time to state clearly that the Taoiseach will not, under any circumstances, accept a hardening of the Border and the chaos that would follow from it for citizens in their daily lives.I ask the Taoiseach to state unequivocally that the backstop remains the bottom line, that he will defend that position and that there will be no resiling from it.I also ask him to set out the Government's plan to protect our all-island trade and economy, our society and our peace agreement in the event of a no-deal, no-backstop Brexit.I am well aware of the intent and the content of the backstop and welcome the Taoiseach's assertion that he will stand by it. I take it that this will remain the case, irrespective of overtures or pressure that might come from the British Government or from other quarters. The backstop is necessary, as the Taoiseach correctly said, to avoid a hard border. It logically follows that in the absence of a backstop, the Border will harden and that will result in many things, including checks as goods crossing that border. The Taoiseach has again failed to set out the contingency in that eventuality, which is not one that I or anyone in this House wishes to come to pass. What happens then? The contingency legislation for east-west matters has been dealt with and we will see that legislation shortly but the big question remains. What happens regarding the Border on the island of Ireland, not least in the context of the consequences for the Good Friday Agreement? What is the contingency plan for that? Let us make no mistake about it, as sure as night follows day, if there is a crash Brexit and there is no backstop, a hardening of the Border will follow automatically.What will the Taoiseach do? I agree with him that his should not, under any circumstances, be the Government that reimposes a hard border on the island of Ireland. However, that begs the question again: what does the Government do?What does the Taoiseach propose to do? What is the contingency in that set of circumstances?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	50	Dublin Central	question	2019-01-16	---	2	The spring legislative programme includes the mental health (amendment) Bill. As the Taoiseach will be aware, this will implement the recommendations of the expert review group, which were published in late 2014. I am pleased that this legislation is listed but it has been listed in legislative programmes since as far back as autumn 2017 and little progress has been made. Mental health resourcing and services have been raised with the Taoiseach by Deputy Wallace. Could priority be given to the legislation? When might we see the Bill? What are the targets in terms of getting the legislation off a list and onto the Statute Book?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-12-12	---	1	"I spoke with the British Prime Minister last night and reiterated the common position of all of us here, which is that the basic protections afforded to Ireland in the withdrawal agreement, particularly the backstop, are non-negotiable and cannot be unpicked or diluted. I spelled out to her the need to ensure that the commitments agreed in last December's joint report by British and EU negotiators are honoured. That means no hardening of the Border on the island of Ireland, that citizens' rights are protected, and that the Good Friday Agreement is upheld in its entirety.In December the Taoiseach said that he had a cast-iron guarantee. He said that he had ""achieved what we sought to achieve"" in respect of avoiding a hard border. He said what we had was ""rock solid"" and ""politically bulletproof"". In the midst of the deepening crisis at Westminster I am afraid to say that those words no longer hold. On Monday Mrs. May shelved her plan to hold a vote on the withdrawal agreement at Westminster and today she faces a vote of no confidence in her leadership. That is a matter for herself. What we need to be concerned with and what is our business is ploughing our furrow.On the concerns around our ports and around investment in them, I am glad that the needs of Rosslare have finally dawned on the Taoiseach. The need for sectoral planning is unanswerable. We also now need to look at any prospect of a no deal scenario or crash come March. I will emphasise that this is not something anybody here, including Sinn Féin in particular, wants to see. When I and others asked the Taoiseach yesterday about contingency planning for a crash scenario, he said ""preparations involve a number of elements including the hiring of staff such as customs' staff, veterinary inspectors [and] environmental health inspectors"". That is all very well and good but, as we all know, a crash-out Brexit would be catastrophic for our island. It would rupture our economy, our social fabric, and our peace accords. The contingency planning required therefore goes well beyond the recruitment of additional officials.I reminded Mrs. May last night that, in the event of a no deal situation arising, it is the strong view of Sinn Féin that a referendum on unity must be advanced as a matter of urgency and priority. Of course she disagrees with that because she is a unionist. That is fair enough, but the Taoiseach is Head of Government here. He should accept that Irish unity is the logical, sensible option to avoid the calamity of a crash or no deal scenario and everything that would entail for our island in the short and long term. I put it to the Taoiseach that in a situation in which the Good Friday Agreement is to be disregarded, a crash situation, we need to go back to the agreement and its provisions for a referendum on Irish unity. Giving the people their say would be the ultimate contingency plan.I agree with the Taoiseach that would not be a helpful thing to do. As he well knows, that is something which we have not done. In fact, considerable and very fruitful efforts have been made to ensure cross-community and cross-party support for a consensus against Brexit in the North. Brexit is a British Tory invention. All this disruption and tension is not of our making or of the making of anyone in this House. It is of the making of the Tories across the water.The Taoiseach talks about relying on a vote at Westminster and the safe passage of the withdrawal agreement. That may or may not occur. Let me emphasise again that I do not want want to see a crash, no more than the Taoiseach does. However, I also want to say to the Taoiseach, as Head of Government with the responsibility to advance Irish national interests and to protect everyone on this island, North and South, east and west, that he now has to plan and prepare for such an unfortunate scenario with eyes wide open. Rather than evading his responsibilities by talking up disruption or disruptive forces, he needs to look this dilemma squarely in the eye.If there is a no-deal Brexit, all bets are off as regards the Good Friday Agreement. All bets are off in terms of economic prosperity, social cohesion and solidarity. Rather than advancing this plan as something that is hostile to any of our people, the Taoiseach needs to understand it as an absolute necessity. In the event of a crash, we need a strong, robust plan B. The only viable plan B is the removal of the Border – the removal of the gash across our island. Has the Taoiseach planned for this contingency? Are plans under way? People need to hear reassuring words from him that he is planning in accordance with the Good Friday Agreement to allow people the opportunity to make a call, ultimately, perhaps between the union with Britain and membership of the European Union?For unity.Is that it?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-12-12	---	2	It is not extreme.It states that one cannot move people out and leave them homeless.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-12-12	---	3	Ar mo shon féin agus ar son Shinn Féin, ba mhaith liom comhbhrón a dhéanamh le clann agus cairde iarTheachta Paddy Harte, a fuair bás i mí Eanáir. On my own behalf and on behalf of Sinn Féin I extend sincere sympathies to the family and friends of former Teachta Paddy Harte, who passed away last January. As has been said, Paddy had a lengthy career in the Dáil, serving the people of his beloved Donegal for no less than 36 years from 1961 to 1997. It is an incredible record. During that time he served briefly as a Minister of State at the Department of Posts and Telegraphs from 1981 to 1982. However, quite correctly, it is for his work on peace and reconciliation that Paddy will be best remembered, particularly his work in delivering the Island of Ireland Peace Park in Flanders which opened in 1998 and which commemorates all Irishmen who died during the First World War. It is a place I was pleased and moved to visit. It is a tribute to him.There is much on which Paddy and I would have disagreed, but I have no doubt that there are also many things on which we would have seen eye to eye. In any event, his contribution to public life was immense. I join others in extending sympathy and condolences to his loved ones, his wife Rosaleen, his nine children Mary, Paddy, Anne, Jimmy, Róisín, Eithne, Johnny, Garrett and Emmett - a formidable clan - his other relatives and friends and his wider family and colleagues in Fine Gael. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a hanam dílis.Arís ar mo shon féin agus ar son Sinn Féin, ba mhaith liom comhbhrón a dhéanamh le clann agus cairde iarTheachta Monica Barnes, a fuair bás i mí Bealtaine. I also extend deep sympathy and condolences to the family and friends of former Teachta, Monica Barnes, who passed away in May. On the occasion of her passing I remarked in the House that she had always struck me as a very untypical member of Fine Gael, which was received as one might expect by her fellow members of Fine Gael. She served in the House for a lengthy period from 1982 to 1992 and again from 1997 to 2002. She was also briefly a Member of the Seanad in 1982.She was undoubtedly one of the most courageous feminist voices of her time and in Irish political history. She was one of a small number of people who had the foresight, compassion and vision to stand against the eighth amendment when it was first proposed. I never met Monica Barnes. I wish I had as I really liked her. I had great admiration for her, and her record of public service speaks for itself. I recall as a young woman listening to her, watching her and being moved and inspired by her. I join with others in extending sympathy and condolences to her husband Bob, her daughters Sarah and Joanne, her siblings, grandchildren, other relatives and friends, as well as her colleagues in Fine Gael. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a hanam dílis.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-12-12	---	4	I was very struck earlier by the Taoiseach's response to the Anti-Evictions Bill 2018 and, frankly, by its coldness. I understand the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, has sought Cabinet approval for measures to strengthen the powers of the Residential Tenancy Board. We welcome the proposed extension of notice to quit periods but the Taoiseach needs to understand that this measure will prove fruitless unless the legislation contains the Focus Ireland anti-homeless amendment to end evictions of tenants in buy-to-let properties being sold or repossessed. Time and again the Taoiseach has shied away from delivering the solutions needed to end the ever-increasing number of families experiencing homelessness. Despite the tea and sympathy approach the Taoiseach takes these are real people, including children who will carry the scar of homelessness for the rest of their lives. Today we learn that homeless families living in hotels are to be unceremoniously kicked out for Christmas Eve and Christmas Day. I have raised this issue before with the Taoiseach and he told me it would not happen, and not to panic. He cited, I think, the papal visit and other occasions. It is happening and today Elaine Wall bravely spoke up for her three children. I hope the Taoiseach heard her. How many families will be affected by the closure of hotels over Christmas and what measures have he and the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government put in place to make sure these children have somewhere to sleep at Christmas time?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-12-11	---	1	As we know, yesterday the British Prime Minister shelved her plan for her so-called meaningful vote on the withdrawal agreement because it was likely to be defeated by a significant margin. As we are all aware, this heightens the prospect of a no deal scenario or a crash out Brexit, which nobody in their right senses wishes to see happen. I know that this matter was discussed at Cabinet this morning and that the Tánaiste has brought forward a paper. It is important that the Government puts the maximum possible information into the public domain regarding the specifics of its sectoral contingency plans.There is a bigger issue. Whatever the contingencies in the here and now for individual sectors, there remain questions around no return to a hard border, no hardening of the Border, the protection of citizens' rights and the integrity of the Good Friday Agreement. Those matters, it should be remembered, are the reasons a backstop was crafted in the first instance. I have repeatedly made it clear to Mrs. Theresa May, the British Prime Minister, that in the event of a crash out or a no deal Brexit it will be incumbent on her to put the question of the constitutional future of the North to the people by way of a referendum. I believe we are on course to such a referendum in any event, but a crash or no deal scenario makes it an immediate prospect. It is time for the Taoiseach and the Government to articulate that same position.If the people of the North are to be disregarded and have their futures toyed with by a British Parliament that does not have a clue what it is doing and has absolutely no regard for this country, they must have their say. This is a reasonable position. It is the only sustainable and serious position and it is one that all parties in the Dáil should support.The European Council agreed in April 2017 that all of the island would be afforded membership of the European Union in the event of national reunification. Amid all the toing and froing, the chaos at Westminster and talk of hard borders, soft borders, deals and no deals, it is a fact that uniting our country would end the need for a backstop, definitively and permanently. The debate on unity is well under way, particularly in the North. Notwithstanding sectoral contingencies, what is the big contingency plan? My suggestion is that it should be the Government preparing contingencies and plans for a constitutional transition and a unity referendum.I do not know if the Taoiseach missed what happened at Westminster. I am not disputing any of the information. I am conversant with the Good Friday Agreement and I know what Theresa May said yesterday. Incidentally, she raised the prospect of Irish unity. I am sure the Taoiseach heard that part of what she said. In this instance we are discussing the contingency planning for the prospect of a crash and no-deal Brexit. The Taoiseach will not convince me or anybody else that recruitment of customs officials and veterinary officers is the answer to that existential crisis, a political and economic earthquake. I am putting to the Taoiseach the logical position that ultimately, to protect the island not just in the short term but also in the long term, the required course of action is to work for the removal of the Border - democratically, peacefully and with the express consent of the people, as per the Good Friday Agreement.Take that as read. I put it to the Taoiseach - I am hoping he has more than the kind of superficial or glib analysis he has offered up here today - that we need a forthright, strong and grounded analysis on how we are to protect this island and all of our citizens in the medium to long term.It is imperative, therefore, that the Taoiseach prepares for a referendum on unity. As head of Government, the correct thing for him to do is put it to Theresa May, as I have done, that in the event of a crash not of our making we will not be the collateral damage of a Tory Brexit, we will protect the national interest and we will prepare the ultimate and only real contingency plan, which is for constitutional transition and a referendum on unity.That is stupid.We know all that.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-12-05	---	1	"Yesterday, I raised with the Taoiseach the crisis impacting on those in the private rental sector and he brushed the concerns I raised aside. I note he is doing the same this morning. As he acknowledged, Threshold has published its annual report, the findings of which illustrate the extent of the plight facing renters across the State. It states:It became evident in 2017 that some landlords and agents were not adhering to the RPZ legislation or were finding ways to circumvent it. The standardised rents in all RPZs rose, some by as much as 10% in the 12-month period following the RPZ designation.As the Taoiseach has acknowledged, that is borne out in other reports.The  quarterly rental report published last month found that the 4% rent pressure zone cap is being breached in every county in the State. The same trend has been recorded in the RTB quarterly index. There have been 20% rent increases in areas such as Limerick and Waterford cities. It is absolutely ludicrous. It is time for the Government to accept that its approach to tackling rent increases has categorically failed. The chairperson of Threshold, Ms Aideen Hayden, stated on the ""Morning Ireland"" radio programme this morning that she has never seen a crisis like this. She has been working in this field for a long time. She highlighted the fact that vacant possession notices to quit are the single biggest cause of homelessness in the State. I have raised that previously with the Taoiseach.I have consistently raised these matters with the Taoiseach, who has consistently given glib responses such as his remarks yesterday about not singling out groups of people such as renters for a tax break. I remind the Taoiseach that the Government, along with its friends in Fianna Fáil, was quite happy to single out one group in the budget for a tax break and that group was landlords. What did we get in the budget? Landlords received 100% mortgage interest relief. There were tax breaks, but they were for landlords rather than struggling tenants. In spite of rents going up and up with no end in sight, the Government chooses to do precisely zero for those who are struggling. That tells it all. It has made the wrong choices and pursued the wrong priorities. While rents go up and up, the Government is found wanting. We need urgent and decisive action to tackle these issues. We need tax relief for renters and a three-year emergency rent freeze.The Focus Ireland amendment which would prevent landlords seeking vacant possession - in other words, booting people out of their homes in order to sell the property - was put to a vote of the Dáil. It addresses one of the loopholes described by Deputy Micheál Martin .It proposes a very necessary change in the law. I remind Deputy Martin and his party that Fianna Fáíl voted against that amendment, along with its Fine Gael colleagues in Government. Shame on Fianna Fáil. It is a disgrace for it to have done that----------and contributed to the haemorrhaging of families, in particular, into homelessness. It did so with its eyes wide open.Yesterday, I asked the Taoiseach to address these issues. I will try again today. When will the Government bring in a rent freeze, a tax break for renters rather than the landlord friends of the Government and the amendment that is necessary to protect people and keep them in their homes when landlords choose to sell?The figures I quoted are not my figures; they were produced by Threshold, the RTB and , which all Members will accept are reputable sources. Of course, this is not about figures and statistics. It is about people. Anybody with eyes, ears and a brain can process what is clearly evident all around us and understand the depths of the crisis we face.The Taoiseach's reply to me this morning is, once again, a complete cop-out. The reality is that the Government was quite prepared to give favourable treatment to landlords in the budget. Although the Taoiseach may not be a landlord, many of his colleagues are.However, the Taoiseach has steadfastly refused to give the same focus to renters. The Government can make one of two choices. It can continue with this claptrap, this trend it is on, and Nero can fiddle while Rome burns, or it can accept the objective facts.While the Taoiseach talks about striking what he regards as an appropriate balance of rights, an article was published in the media today----------which states that many people who are in homelessness and relying on hotel accommodation may be turfed out from that accommodation as Christmas approaches. We raise these matters with the Taoiseach and we get nonsense and cop-outs and claptrap about Christmas trees. What is the Taoiseach going to do for renters? What contingency plans are in place for people who may face being thrown out of the hotel accommodation on which they are relying?No. I asked the Taoiseach for answers, but he has singularly not given any.Unlike the Taoiseach, I do care.That is pathetic. The Taoiseach is the Head of Government."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-12-05	---	2	The Society of St. Vincent de Paul stated yesterday that it expects that energy price increases in the coming weeks and months will force low-income households to go without heat and light. Ms Caroline Fahey, head of the Society of St. Vincent de Paul social justice team, said that price increases are really going to hit struggling households hard as so many are already finding it difficult to make ends meet. It also means that the increase in the fuel allowance in budget 2019 will be completely wiped out by the latest price hikes. This is not a minor issue. Fuel poverty affects tens of thousands of families across the State and is only going to get worse as these price increases take effect. What plan is in place to assist families that are going to struggle with these price increases? Will consideration be given to extending the fuel allowance to those in receipt of the working family payment?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-12-04	---	1	Traditionally, December is the time of year when we think, in particular, of those who are homeless and, more specifically, those citizens who are sleeping rough. We know from last week's homelessness figures that there are now more people homeless in the State than ever before. We also know that the official figures actually understate the reality of homelessness across society. The rough sleeper count, published yesterday, shows a 40% increase in the number sleeping rough since March, which is shocking. It is no exaggeration to say hundreds of thousands of people across society are affected by the housing crisis. Up and down the country, families are worried about whether they will have a roof over their heads come January. People in the private rental sector are being hit time and again with rent increases which are still exorbitantly high, while long promised social housing is being constructed at a snail's pace. House prices are out of control and, for young people, owning a home is a pipedream.The Taoiseach's response is to stick with the plan. It may not have occurred to him, but his plan is not working. In fact, he is failing spectacularly. Last Saturday thousands of people took to the streets of this city to tell him that. I think it is time he listened to them. Last week the Central Bank stated to would-be homeowners who wish to get out of the high rental trap to wait and hang on for new homes to be built before trying to buy. That would be prudent and worthy advice if houses were coming on stream and people were in a position to actually save a few bob. Week in and week out, the Taoiseach and the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government and their colleagues state , both here and elsewhere, that people should simply wait, that the houses will arrive, yet we continue to witness homelessness and the housing crisis. We have highfalutin guarantees that new homes will sort everything out, but that they will only arrive at some undefined point in the future.The crisis is real. It is in the here and now. Frankly, people are fed up waiting for the Taoiseach to get his act together. They are being screwed, day in, day out, with runaway rents and it seems the Government is incapable of taking meaningful action. The Taoiseach seems to specialise in empty promises. We need something tangible that will benefit the people who are struggling and need a break. I put it to the Taoiseach that he should do something decent and constructive to cut people a bit of slack. I suggest the introduce a three-year rent freeze and temporary tax relief for renters with immediate effect.The Taoiseach's party has been in government for more than seven years. For the purposes of clarity, the theme I raised was not Christmas so much as the theme of a housing crisis and a homelessness crisis over which the Taoiseach and his colleagues have presided. People took to the streets in vast numbers on Saturday. I am sure all of us are aware that it is not easy to mobilise people. The very clear message being sent by the thousands of people who took to the streets on the brow of Christmas is that the Government is failing and that they want it to change tack and to be imaginative, decisive and brave. I think it would be wise to listen to that message. I am very familiar with the Housing First approach, which was mentioned by the Taoiseach. I have been informed by Deputy Ó Broin that the Government is planning to cater for 200 people, when in fact the need is somewhere closer to 3,000. That is a metaphor for how short the Government has fallen in terms of need and public expectation.I would like the Taoiseach to address the question I asked about the possibility of a rent freeze. I put it to him again that there is a need to adopt the proposal known as the Focus amendment to deal with the issue of landlords seeking vacant possession to sell houses and homes over the heads of tenants.This is one of the main contributing factors, if not the main one, to homelessness and family homelessness in particular. I have mentioned two concrete, innovative, brave and decisive things that the Taoiseach could do if he were minded to get a grip on this situation.Can we have a straight answer on the rent freeze as well as on the amendment to the law that has been proposed and with which the Taoiseach is familiar?It has been known as the Focus amendment since it was advanced by Focus Ireland in the first instance.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-11-28	---	1	Despite the fact that it is still only November, we are in the run-up to Christmas. Any family with small children would state that is 27 sleeps until Santa arrives. For many families, the reality of making Christmas happen is one of stress and expense. Regrettably, providing even essentials is beyond the means of many. That unfortunate reality means that many families resort to borrowing money, some from friends, family members, credit unions or banks. However, that will not be an option for others and many of them will resort to borrowing from moneylenders and loan sharks who, in many cases, are unlicensed and charge punitive and frankly disgusting interest rates. They are a scourge on our society.There is also a licensed moneylending industry in this State whose practices are equally repulsive. A UK-based moneylender, Amigo Loans, has been given a licence by the Central Bank to operate in Ireland. The Central Bank has sanctioned it to offer loans with interest rates of up to 49.9% to people who have been excluded from accessing mainstream finance. Amigo Loans considers that to be mid-cost credit. I would call it daylight robbery. Amigo Loans is not the only entity involved in this game. A fortnight ago, the Centre for Co-operative Studies at UCC published a report on behalf of the Social Finance Foundation. That report indicates that moneylenders in this State are licensed to charge interest rates of up to 187% which, when collection charges are added, rises to an average percentage rate, APR, of 287%. The report also states that a total of 21 of the 28 EU member states apply caps to high-cost credit. That includes Ireland but, ironically, the only cap we apply is in respect of credit unions. We do not apply any cap on moneylenders. That is the reason moneylenders go door to door delivering leaflets at this time of year, preying on the vulnerabilities of people coming up to Christmas and charging these kinds of extortionate rates. Moneylenders are getting rich on the back of hard-pressed people who are simply trying to provide for their families. They can do this because the system in place allows them to do it. This is State-sponsored robbery. There is an urgent need to introduce a cap on the interest rates these types of outfits can charge. There is also a need for more wide-ranging reform of the regulation of moneylenders and the policing of illegal loan sharks.A number of years ago, Sinn Féin introduced a Bill that would have capped the interest rates moneylenders can charge but the Taoiseach's party and the Labour Party voted it down. I put it to the Taoiseach that it is now time to introduce a cap on moneylenders to ensure they can no longer get away with their daylight robbery.I thank the Taoiseach. His Government presides over an Ireland of soup kitchens, child homelessness, mothers queuing for formula and nappies, insecure employment and 300,000 people living in consistent poverty. To be clear, many of those people are at work. They get up at the crack of dawn and still struggle and fail to meet their basic requirements. I take it the Taoiseach is not suggesting that an interest rate of 49.9% is anything other than absolutely extortionate. Whatever argument he might make about the regulation of the financial services sector globally, there is no excuse for a Government standing over such a scandalous situation. That the State sanctions these outfits - ironically, in this case it is called Amigo Loans but I assure the Taoiseach that this amigo is no friend of anybody who borrows from it - and stands idly by and allows that to happen is nothing short of disgraceful.We have put it to this House previously and we will again that we need a cap. I want the Taoiseach to commit to that and to accept, like me, that this is an outrageous situation. By the way, this is what is called mid-cost credit. Does the Taoiseach regard it as such?Does he regard it as acceptable that people are ripped off in this way?In the context of the credit union It Makes Sense loan, I suggest that, rather than offering excuses to the House, the Taoiseach might act more vigorously and further resource that approach with the credit unions. It is a good approach----------but there are credit unions from which it is not available. There is no point preaching to people to look for alternatives when for so many families there is simply no other alternative bar these vultures.People living in poverty do not have a choice.Being poor is not a choice.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-11-28	---	2	Ar mo shon féin agus ar son Shinn Féin, ba mhaith liom comhbhrón a dhéanamh le clann agus cairde an iar-Theachta Seán Ardagh, a fuair bás i mí na Bealtaine 2016. On my own behalf and that of Sinn Féin, I wish to express sincere and heartfelt sympathies to the family and friends of former Deputy, Seán Ardagh, who passed away in May 2016. Seán, as we have heard had a lengthy and distinguished career in politics at local and national level, serving as a member of Dublin County Council for 14 years, a member of Dublin City Council and in this House for three terms. His daughter, Catherine, whom we acknowledge today, is also a former Dublin City councillor and a Member of the Seanad. I have absolutely no doubt that her father was beyond proud when she assumed office in the Seanad.I join with everyone in extending sympathy and condolences to Catherine, and to all of Seán's loved ones, particularly his wife, Máire, his sons, Rory and Charlie, all his grandchildren, relatives and friends and his colleagues in Fianna Fáil. He made his mark and made a difference. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam.Ba mhaith liom freisin comhbhrón a dhéanamh ar mo shon féin agus ar son Shinn Féin le clann agus cairde an iar-Theachta Seán Calleary, a fuair bás i mí an Mheithimh i mbliana. On my behalf and that of my party, Sinn Féin, I equally extend sincere condolences and heartfelt sympathies to the family and friends of former Deputy, Seán Calleary, who passed away last June. I did not know Seán but he had a lengthy and distinguished career in this place and, as we have discovered, a formidable sporting career as well.Seán Calleary served in the House from 1973 to 1992, representing the fine people of Mayo as a Teachta Dála, like his father Phelim before him, and his son, our colleague, Deputy Dara Calleary. It is a formidable political family tree and I know Deputy Calleary takes enormous pride in the record and standing of his father. I have no doubt that Seán was equally proud of Dara. During his time in the House, Seán Calleary served in three junior ministerial positions in the Departments of Labour and Public Service, Industry and Commerce and Foreign Affairs. I join colleagues in extending sympathy and condolences to Seán's wife Doris, his children, John, Conall, Dara and Síofra, his grandchildren, relatives, friends and colleagues in Fianna Fáil. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam dílis.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-11-28	---	3	Earlier this morning, questions on the tendering process in respect of the national broadband plan, NBP, arose. Next week, we will have the opportunity to deliberate further on those matters but I want to raise the fact that more than 500,000 rural homes, businesses and farms are due to receive fast-tracked high-speed broadband connections next year. The Taoiseach has confirmed that contract will be signed in January. Will he confirm that again for the House? When will Members and communities receive details of the locations that are to be connected next year? I was in Kerry recently where the Healy-Raes live----------the Healy-Raes' kingdom, in Tralee and Castleisland. The issues facing rural Ireland are manifold. They cannot be reduced down to broadband but there is significant impatience with delivery. While all of this ruaille buaille about procurement and so on plays out politically, people are left without this service. Will the Taoiseach confirm the January date? Can he tell us when we and people outside this House will know the precise locations for connection?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-11-28	---	4	I also commend Senator Bacik on introducing this important legislation. As my colleague stated, we will support the Bill. Indeed, we share the frustration of the Labour Party with Government foot-dragging on the issue. The gender pay gap is not a new issue. A multitude of research has been undertaken across the EU and in Ireland on the subject. Back in 2002 the Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform commissioned Indecon to undertake a study on male-female wage differentials in a number of sectors. So accepted is the fact of the gender pay gap that the EU has an annual European Equal Pay Day to highlight the gap which we all know now stands at just under 14%.With all this in mind, why on earth is the Government frustrating the introduction of gender pay gap reporting in Ireland? When this legislation was first introduced 17 months ago, the Minister of State with responsibility for equality acknowledged that the Bill echoed current programme for Government commitments. However, despite this, the Government failed to engage and dragged its heels before finally producing its own heads of Bill more than a year later.In justifying this decision, the Taoiseach told us last week that a new Bill was necessary as changes were needed to the Long Title and Short Title. That is simply not credible, nor is the Minister of State's concern with the new section 32A. His concern seems to be that oversight and initiative are robbed from the Minister and that it falls to the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission. I am very happy to see such a change. We have waited so long and the political establishment and the Government have been in such a state of splendid inertia on this issue, I am very happy for a commission with responsibility for human rights and equality to set the pace on this. God knows, if we were waiting for the Government we would be waiting a very long time. Irish women and Irish society are no longer prepared to wait.It is not just about the reporting of gender pay differentials. We need to be honest about this and look at low-paid sectors in our economy. We need to be honest about this and look at cost of living. We need to be honest and say we need to do so much more, including the introduction of a living wage and rent caps. We need market interventions. For today, we support this legislation. The Minister of State, Deputy Stanton, is a reasonable person and I do not question his good faith on these matters. I appeal to him; for God's sake let us stop the delay. This is good legislation. If he wants to argue for amendments, I think he is concerned unnecessarily.I have far more faith in the commission charged with equality and human rights than I would have in many who have graced ministerial office. I appeal to the Minister of State to support the legislation, allow it to proceed and give the women of Ireland some Christmas cheer.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-11-21	---	1	This week, balloting for industrial action began among more than 40,000 nurses and midwives. This is a mark and a measure of the desperation and frustration of nurses and midwives. The Minister for Finance, by way of response to this ballot, is hard-balling nursing and midwifery staff by claiming that their pay demands would compromise budgetary policy. He made this claim just two days after the Taoiseach promised a €3 billion tax cut at the Fine Gael Ard-Fheis. The threat of industrial action by nurses and midwives is the inevitable consequence of this Government's failure to deal with the recruitment and retention crisis in our health service and among nursing staff in particular. For years now nurses, midwives and their unions have highlighted this recruitment and retention crisis and have proposed reasonable and responsible solutions to address it but there has been complete disengagement from the Government on the issue.Our nurses and midwives, as everyone will agree, provide an invaluable service to patients in our health system and we should expect that their jobs pay well. We should also expect high morale in their ranks but that is not the case. Nurses are justifiably frustrated at the current state of affairs. It is little wonder that there is just one application for every four nursing and midwifery vacancies in the health service. That in itself tells the story. All the while, the Taoiseach and the Ministers for Finance and Health do not want to talk about the issue of pay but they must. We have a very troubling situation now with desperate and frustrated nurses and midwives on one side and a Government that is happy to resort to megaphone diplomacy rather than direct engagement on the other.In April, the Dáil passed a Sinn Féin motion calling for the introduction of recruitment and retention measures based on realistic proposals, with the prioritisation of pay. It called on the Government to work with the unions to draw up a roadmap to full pay equality for nurses and midwives, with an implementation plan to deliver that equality within a short timeframe and not the eight year period proposed by the Government. Will the Taoiseach now commit to acting on that motion? Will the Government engage with the unions to ensure that nurses and health professionals get a fair deal and we are not facing into industrial relations chaos?This morning, there are 425 people on hospital trolleys, including 14 children. There are 63 people on trolleys in Limerick, for example, 34 in Cork University Hospital and 34 in Tallaght Hospital. I could go on and recite the litany right across the State. In my opening remarks I said that there is only one application for every four nursing and midwifery vacancies in the system. The Taoiseach has acknowledged and accepted that there is a crisis at the heart of our health system, yet he seems unprepared to do what is necessary to resolve it. The very last thing that we need now is industrial action by nurses and midwives. The HSE will only introduce its winter plan at the end of November. That is how far behind the curve the system is in dealing with the burden of health care. The nurses have a legitimate claim and grievance. The Taoiseach has said the Government will engage with all of the unions. What form will that engagement take? He cited the industrial relations apparatus, with which I am more than familiar, but it will take more than that. Will the Taoiseach and the Ministers for Finance and Health meet the unions? Will they sit down, face to face, around the table to seek a resolution to this crisis?Not on the issue of pay-----It is a chair count.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-11-21	---	2	I understand the Cabinet yesterday gave the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, the go-ahead to bring forward a Bill to provide for a referendum that, if passed, would ensure the continued public ownership of water services. The Taoiseach spoke earlier about cross-party consensus, which he seems to support at this juncture. I remind the Government that the protection of public ownership of water services was a key recommendation of both the expert commission on domestic water services and the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Future Funding of Domestic Water Services. I believe it is a measure that is supported by a majority of Teachtaí in the Dáil and, more important, the vast majority of citizens. Could we have an indication of when we might see the Bill? Could we also have an indication of when the referendum might be brought to the people?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-11-20	---	1	"I see arriving into the Gallery some of the Stardust families who have handed in a petition today. I extend a very warm welcome to them and wish them the very best in their campaign to reopen the inquest into that fire on St. Valentine's Day 1981. Tá fáilte romhaibh.At the weekend, to rapturous applause, the Taoiseach made the bold claim that he would, if re-elected, deliver five years of tax cuts. He did not couch his comments with the word ""but"" or explain to people that his plan was to give with one hand and to take back with the other. However, this is exactly what we see with the latest announcement that tens of thousands of workers, many of them very low-paid workers, will lose their entitlement to claim flat-rate expenses. This was confirmed in the response of the Minister, Deputy Donohoe, to a parliamentary question tabled by my colleague, an Teachta Pearse Doherty, last week. We are talking here about a few bob that workers claim to cover the cost of equipment that they need for work, things like uniforms, tools and stationery. We are not talking about wholesale tax breaks which, as the Taoiseach knows, others enjoy. We are talking about very legitimate and necessary expenditure which certain categories of workers incur as part of their jobs. Some 75,822 shop assistants, the group worst affected, will lose more than €120 a year. This will mean a net saving to the Exchequer of €9 million per annum. It is hardly a massive outlay. Nonetheless, the loss of it for individual workers on low wages will be felt. This entire proposal is a prime example of policy set at a complete disconnect from reality. The high cost of living weighing down on ordinary workers cannot be tackled if the taxman snipes away at the very modest and necessary expenses they can claim.Let us contrast this with the Government's treatment of the super-rich. As of this summer, there were nearly 500 high-wealth individuals who possess wealth in excess of €50 million each. In 2015 this cohort claimed a combined €93 million in tax credits, a great multiple of what was claimed by low-paid workers. Of this sum, €45 million was claimed in capital allowances, mostly by landlords claiming tax relief on furniture. The very rich can avail of €93 million in tax reliefs, yet the Taoiseach wants to scrap the very small tax relief of a couple of euro a week for ordinary working people. This is unbelievable. Ending the tax break for banks would have brought in €175 million; ending the tax break for multinational corporations, which onshore----------intangible assets, would have raised €750 million.When it comes to priorities, it is obvious where the Government stands.Ordinary workers fall to the bottom of the pile yet again.Will the Taoiseach instruct Revenue to scrap this move without delay?On 14 November, I think it was, I was in Sligo Grammar School at a remembrance service which was absolutely wonderful and inclusive.Indeed, all of the party leaders had been invited but I went and I paid my respects there. This is the list of the categories of workers to which this flat-rate expenses scheme applies. It includes people such as panel beaters, kitchen porters, nurses and members of the Defence Forces, whom we all know are appallingly paid at the lower ranks in any event. The Taoiseach wants to create for these workers an elaborate system for them to vouch and claim very modest reliefs.Many of these workers will look into this Chamber, will have heard the words of the Taoiseach and will know that many of the expenses enjoyed in this Chamber are not vouched. There is no such elaborate paperwork required. The Taoiseach's answer simply amplifies his position. A very different view is taken of the very rich, the very wealthy, the banks, the billion dollar corporates and the landlords. Landlords claimed an astonishing figure of €45 million in capital allowances and the lion's share of that was claimed for tax reliefs on furniture.By the way, Deputy Pearse Doherty advises me that the Taoiseach's response indicated that none of this kicks in until 2020. In the answer Deputy Doherty received, he was advised that it takes effect from 1 January 2019. The date is looming. I ask the Taoiseach again. Notwithstanding his jibes against me, will he, for once, empathise----------put himself in the shoes of retail workers, of shop assistants----------and give them a break for once?Answer the question."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-11-14	---	1	I thank Deputy Lahart for introducing the legislation. It recognises the decades of social and economic neglect the north inner city of Dublin has endured. Fianna Fáil is no doubt acutely aware of successive Governments' failure to deliver the political and policy decisions necessary to tackle the embedded inequalities in this part of our city. The Deputy’s party leader was a Cabinet member for 20 consecutive years, yet did nothing to address the social and economic challenges of the inner city. In that time, no bright light was shone on the intergenerational poverty, unemployment and blockages to education experienced daily. There was no dogged ongoing commitment to radically changing the outcomes for children and their families. Let us imagine the positive, life-changing interventions that could have been delivered for this community over the course of two decades. The Bill is a welcome albeit belated recognition by the Deputy of his party’s historic failure to grip the declining fortunes of the inner city and hopefully it signals a new and long-term commitment to transforming the lives of those who live there.There are a number of current projects and challenges within the inner city that need urgent attention. The regeneration of O'Devaney Gardens needs to be completed without any further delays. We have yet to receive a completion date for the Croke Villas project. The Department of Justice and Equality and Dublin City Council have failed to deliver on their commitment to develop an appropriate memorial at the Seán McDermott Street site to the women who survived the Magdalen laundries. This particular failure is truly astounding and gives an insight into the sometimes shallow response by the State when acknowledging the horrific treatment meted out to our most vulnerable women and children, very many of whom came from Dublin's north inner city. Intergenerational unemployment has not been grappled, nor have the systematic flexible approaches and supports required to redirect early school leavers to education and training. While progress has been made at a community policing level, the impact of criminal feuds and low-level crime in the inner city continues to have a deep and detrimental effect on peoples' sense of security and happiness. We regularly hear from individuals and families who simply do not feel safe in their homes, in their blocks of flats or on their streets.There is a lack of ambition and vision at Government and council management level for the inner city and its long-term success. For me, the refusal of the Government to engage with Dublin City Council to purchase Aldborough House typifies this failure. Visitors to any modern city will see how sites like Aldborough House and Seán MacDermott Street’s former Magdalen laundry can be creatively reimagined, often as self-financing cultural and historical sites enjoyed by locals and visitors alike. Why must government at every level and the officials always seek to limit the aspirations for areas like the inner city? Why is an approach of tinkering around the edges always favoured above deep, transformative change? Why have they failed to work together to deliver the radical changes the community has cried out for?If an authority is to be established, it must never become yet another underperforming quango that fails to deliver for the long term. That is my concern. Sinn Féin will enable the passage of this legislation to the next Stage. However, we do this on the basis that if it is to progress through the House we will submit very significant changes and amendments. As it stands, it is merely a superficial nod to what needs to be done in the inner city, with all due respect. The Bill provides that the authority will deliver social and economic regeneration, and improvements in areas like the physical environment. It is intended that the authority will prepare a strategy for the regeneration of the area and promote investment by statutory bodies. The spirit of these commitments is welcome, although arguably we should not need a new quango to achieve on these standard deliverables if there were a collective political will to do so.Section 5 of the Bill provides for enabling the authority to dispose of land that is in the ownership of the State on completion of its development, redevelopment, renewal or conservation. This is a significant cause of concern and a provision that we could not accept should the Bill progress through the Oireachtas. As the Deputy knows, this Bill cannot confer such a right on the authority. Even if the Bill could bypass existing legislation that governs the disposal of public land, I would be surprised if his Dublin City Council colleagues would support the Deputy's intention to strip them of their democratic powers in this regard.This concern is compounded by the Bill’s sidelining of community representation on the authority’s board. This is what puzzles me most. The Bill proposes having six Government officials, three State agency representatives, three business representatives and just three persons from the North Inner City Community Coalition. A glaring omission is the lack of an official from the Department of Children and Youth Affairs. Anyone who knows Dublin's north inner city will know those are critical players to have around the table.As the Deputy is no doubt aware, community leaders have called for the proposed authority to have an independent chair and yet the legislation does not provide for this. The board does not include local elected representatives or experts in the various fields necessary to deliver the transformative public policy needed to address the community’s imbedded challenges. It is worth noting that all of the officials the legislation provides for are already working within the implementation group of the north-east inner city programme.The legislation also commits to implement the recommendations of Kieran Mulvey’s Dublin North East Inner City report. I am unsure why the Deputy would seek to duplicate this same work which is ongoing.I am also concerned that the Bill’s limited provisions mirror the Dublin Docklands Development Authority Act, which ended in tears. Given the many failures and shortcomings associated with that project, surely any similar project should reflect the lessons learned from the past mistakes made by the Deputy’s party.I will work with any and all political representatives and State officials to deliver social and economic regeneration and improvements in the physical environment of Dublin's north inner city. However, my ambition for this community is much greater than that outlined in the Bill. As a Deputy honoured to be elected to represent the constituency, I understand that transformative change is required to ensure that we are the last generation of Deputies to raise the deeply sad and entirely avoidable social and economic inequalities that are written deep into the fabric of Dublin's north inner city.We must radically decrease the number of early school leavers and address poverty, which is at the root of all of this. Fluidity and flexibility are required in the delivery of all services, in particular health care and the supports necessary to extract people from the grip of drug addiction. The State must support lone parents in their efforts to improve their lot through education, retraining and employment.Delivery of social and affordable housing to include cost-rental homes must be ramped up. So too must the quality of the homes within existing stock and future developments. The Deputy knows as well as I do that too many public and private tenants are living in homes riddled with damp and mould. They are tenement buildings in 2018. Flats are so small that children have no kitchen table on which to do their homework. This is an abiding theme of mine. It might sound odd on first hearing. These are homes with no kitchen table at which to do homework, have a meal at or have a gathering of the family. What is that all about in 2018? Teenagers and their parents have no privacy. Adult children are sharing bedrooms with their mothers. Homeless families spend months and sometimes years in emergency accommodation.We must also demand the development of cultural, creative and historic spaces as a staple of any future development projects. Officialdom needs to commit to an indepth and meaningful consultation with the community in all its parts to develop a long-term vision for Dublin's north inner city. That needs to be more than just regeneration packages. Regeneration is an important component, but only a single component of the objective to build a safe, sustainable, vibrant and hopeful community in Dublin's north inner city.The deliverables from any authority need to be properly resourced. If not, then all of this is just optics. It means real investment in infrastructure, supports and people. It means a real programme to eradicate poverty. If these commitments are not hardwired into the legislation, this will end up being yet another meaningless Bill, delivered by a political party that felt it needed to engage in empty gesture politics in respect of the people I represent in Dublin's north inner city. We can do better than that.I believe James Connolly put it best and I say this on behalf of my constituents in Dublin's north inner city:For our demands most moderate are,We only want the earth.Crumbs from the table, however well intentioned, however polished the legislative language, are simply not enough. Dublin's inner city needs investment. We need decent housing, decent education, flexibility in how we deliver our services, belief and hope in our people.We will give the legislation a fair wind and will not block it. However, I am not convinced this is the panacea and I have pointed out some of its design flaws. If political leadership in this Chamber believes that people in Dublin's north inner city, their advocates and community leaders will be appeased or satisfied by gesture politics and continuing sweet rhetoric, they are wrong. We want results. We want decent homes, decent work and a decent chance. That means the Government needs to be prepared not to invest through a quango, but to invest directly in all those things. That is the challenge for all of us.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-11-13	---	1	"The programme ""Whistleblower"" was broadcast last night on RTÉ television. It illustrated again in some detail the horrific treatment of Maurice McCabe for daring to speak out about Garda malpractice in the Cavan Monaghan division. We are agreed that Maurice is a good and honourable man of incredible strength. He, his wife, Lorraine, and their family deserve not only our support and solidarity but also our gratitude. For daring to speak out and for putting his head above the parapet, Maurice was smeared and bullied by fellow members of An Garda Síochána. He was the subject of the most despicable type of character assassination imaginable. That is a fact. The Charleton tribunal found that Maurice was ""repulsively denigrated"" for being nothing more than a good citizen and police officer. The tribunal also established that the then Garda Commissioner, Martin Callinan, undertook a most disgraceful attack on Maurice, aided and abetted by his press officer, Dave Taylor.Against that backdrop, Maurice McCabe is justifiably pursuing legal action against the State and Martin Callinan. However, it has emerged in recent days that the State will pay Mr. Callinan's legal fees, using taxpayer's money, which is outrageous. Martin Callinan is a man who went around telling people falsely and without foundation that Maurice McCabe was a child sex abuser who should not be trusted.At the weekend the Taoiseach stated: ""As a former State employee who is being sued in the course of his work it is the norm for the State to offer representation..."". However, I put it to the Taoiseach that this is not a normal case. Mr. Callinan has, of course, every right to defend himself in court but in this case, which is being taken by the person he repulsively denigrated, he should not get one red cent of State money. Setting out to destroy Maurice McCabe was his doing and he should face the consequences of his actions. The reputation of An Garda Síochána, as we all know, was deeply damaged by this episode. For the State to now come to Mr. Callinan's aid by way of providing for his legal fees is simply not acceptable.The decision taken by the acting Commissioner, Mr. Ó Cualáin, to recommend, under the Garda Síochána Act, that a defence be funded by the State was a decision taken before the tribunal had concluded and before it had found so heavily against Martin Callinan.The State has already failed Maurice McCabe on numerous occasions and now it looks set to support the individual who went to extraordinary lengths to destroy his character. I want the Taoiseach to state categorically here this afternoon that this will not be the case. I want him to ensure that Mr. Callinan funds his own legal defence.I thank the Taoiseach for that answer. I very much hope we can get clarity and finality on these matters.We are agreed that this is not a normal case. In fact, it is exceptional. We are agreed that Charleton found against Martin Callinan and that the tribunal's report has been accepted by the State. We are also agreed that it would be a contradiction in terms unthinkable for the State, on Mr. Callinan’s behalf, to enter any form of defence. That simply would not make any sense at all.The Taoiseach said this matter is being reviewed, which I welcome. When will we have the outcome of that review? When will we know for certain that not a red cent of taxpayers’ money will be used to defend Mr. Callinan? If this case is settled - I agree with the Taoiseach that it ought to be and speedily - will Mr. Callinan and others be pursued for costs?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-11-06	---	1	"Last December when the joint report of the EU and British Government negotiators was published, the Taoiseach hailed it as a panacea for all of Brexit's ills. He said at the time that it ""achieved what we sought to achieve"" in avoiding a hard border. He also said it was not only rock solid but ""cast iron."" He claimed that it was politically bulletproof. His language was such that very many people took him at his word, but we, in Sinn Féin, urged caution at the time. We urged the Taoiseach not to oversell the achievement. Our caution was well placed because shortly after the December announcement the British Government rowed back and it has been rowing back on its commitments ever since. The bottom line and the need to mitigate the effects of Brexit are well known: no hardening of the Border on the island, no undermining of the Good Friday Agreement and no loss of citizens' rights.The so-called backstop arrangement is supposed to be our guarantee and insurance policy that there will be no hard border on the island and the interests of our citizens will be protected. I am sure the Taoiseach agrees that those protections remain vital. The consequences of Brexit are real. They are a threat to our social and political fabric and economy, North and South. They are real, lasting and enduring threats. Brexit is for keeps.To combat those real and enduring consequences, we need a solution to match, one that is not time bound or temporary, not couched in ifs, buts or conditions, but is an absolute and permanent guarantee. I thought that was clearly understood by all of us in this House. I thought that was the Taoiseach's position. There cannot be any fudging on that. A temporary or transitory backstop is not a backstop at all. Temporary protections mean no protection. Answers for our country need to be real. Enduring Brexit is not compatible with the Good Friday Agreement and we need a unique, bespoke solution for our island.Yesterday when the Taoiseach said he was willing to consider proposals for a review clause for the backstop, he shifted position. It is not a matter of nuance, but a substantial and reckless change in position by the Government at this most sensitive time in the negotiation. The Taoiseach's announcement yesterday was a cock-up, plain and simple, and I ask him to clarify the position of his Government and invite him to set aside any notion or proposal of a review clause in what is to be our insurance policy in the face of Brexit.The Taoiseach's difficulty is that he has, in fact, resiled from his stated negotiating position.He has done it at a time that arguably could not be worse. We are at crunch time and truth time. We urged the Taoiseach and the Barnier negotiating team not to blink in their dealings with the Tories in London and to stay the course with the very reasonable bottom line protections that Ireland requires. The Taoiseach says we need an arrangement with no expiry date or unilateral exit clause, yet he countenances a review mechanism. All that serves to do is muddy the waters. I do not know if the Taoiseach has lost his nerve. I hope, for the sake of this country, that he has not. We do not need a review clause. We need a clear enunciation of the protections in legally operable text. That is what we have all agreed on and that is the job of work but yesterday, the Taoiseach potentially torpedoed all of that.I urge him, as Head of Government, not to lose his nerve or blink at this stage. How on earth, at such a sensitive time in a negotiation, can the Taoiseach commit himself to a review clause? Reviews, by definition----------imply things that are time-bound and transitory. How has the Taoiseach committed himself to that when he now says on the floor of the Dáil that he has seen no wording and does not in fact know what it would amount to?That is not creative; it is dangerous."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-10-24	---	1	It is almost two years since the Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes outlined details of excavations carried out at the site of the former mother and baby home in Tuam, County Galway, which discovered a significant quantity of human remains. From what we know, the bodies buried there are those of children and babies aged up to the three years old who were unceremoniously buried without anything to identify them or their last resting place. It is a cause of national shame.Yesterday the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Deputy Katherine Zappone, announced that a forensic excavation of the site will now take place. I commend the Minister and the Government on that decision because it is significant and to be welcomed. I acknowledge today the tireless work of Catherine Corless, of the survivors, of their families and loved ones, of all of those who care for those who were buried on the site, and of the campaigners who have supported them in their long pursuit of justice. Without them yesterday's decision would not have been taken.I have a number of questions relating to what was announced yesterday which I wish to put to the Taoiseach. The Minister, Deputy Zappone, has said that specific legislation will be required before the excavation can commence but, as of yet, she has not given any timeframe for when that legislation might be considered. Will the Taoiseach clarify for the Dáil when that legislation will come before us? We also require clarity in respect of costs. The cost of the forensic excavation has been estimated at between €6 million and €13 million. Catherine Corless said this morning that it is in fact likely to cost significantly more than that. From where did the announced estimate come? How will the excavation be funded?It was announced yesterday that the religious order which ran the mother and baby home in Tuam, the Bon Secours Sisters, will contribute €2.5 million to the cost of the excavation. I put it to the Taoiseach that the order bears at least an equal responsibility to that of the State in respect of this scandal and should pay significantly more on that basis.I commend the Minister for taking the right decision but there are significant issues relating to the announcement that need clarification and explanation. It is important that time is provided in the Dáil for the Minister to make a statement and to take questions from Members. As the Taoiseach knows, the home at Tuam was just one of a network of institutions which systematically violated the rights of women and children. I hope that yesterday's decision is the beginning of a process that will see similar steps taken to investigate, locate and recover remains from other such sites in a timely manner. What is being considered in respect of other former mother and baby homes, other sites that are out there and known to us all?There is absolutely no doubt that the Taoiseach has decided on the right course of action. There is also no doubt that it is of immense importance to the survivors and their families, in the first instance, that the right thing is done but more broadly it is of immense importance for us as a society to consciously do the right thing in respect of these women and the children who were born into these institutions, those who spent time in them, those who survived them and, most particularly, those who perished. I will repeat that, as the Taoiseach knows, the home at Tuam is not unique by any stretch. There are many other mother and baby homes. There are many sites where families will stand - and I have stood with them - and speculate as to whether a child, a brother or a sister who was lost is buried there and precisely where. This is uncharted territory for us, but we need to get it right. I urge the Taoiseach to ensure that the legislation comes forward in a timely fashion. I will return to, and ask the Taoiseach about, the issue of costs.It seems to me that €2.5 million from the Bon Secours is an entirely inadequate contribution to the excavation. I ask that the Government goes and seeks a higher contribution from the Bon Secours. It strikes me that at least 50% of the costs incurred would rightfully fall to them. Is there any sign that there will also be a contribution from the Vatican because that issue was also raised?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-10-24	---	2	The programme for Government acknowledges that significant Exchequer resources will be invested in capital spending in the education sector yet issues surrounding these publicly procured projects show a series of errors. Following the collapse of Carillion and Sammon there remains a myriad of outstanding issues relating to school building projects including in my constituency. As we discussed earlier, we now learn that there are significant structural and safety concerns relating to 40 schools built by Western Building Systems over the last ten years. Three schools have already faced closure and there is no clear plan from the Department on alternative accommodation.Does the Taoiseach agree that this latest debacle reflects a significant and unprecedented failure in Government procurement and regulatory frameworks? Will he clarify what specific actions the Minister for Education and Skills has taken or will take to ensure appropriate alternative accommodation is provided for the pupils and teachers affected by this?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-10-23	---	1	Before I ask my question, I extend our sympathy to the family of the former Deputy, Seymour Crawford, who I understand is being laid to rest today. I offer sympathy to the Taoiseach and his party colleagues. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam dílis.This morning, Care Alliance Ireland published a report on the provision and shortcomings of public provision of home care. Its findings are stark and they highlight a shocking reality facing thousands of our most vulnerable citizens in need of care and support.The report finds that more than 6,000 people are on waiting lists for home care packages, a finding that was also communicated to my party colleague, An Teachta O'Reilly, in which the HSE acknowledged to her that the number of people waiting for home-care support stands at 6,118. The report states that people are waiting for up to two years in some cases for home care support and that the average waiting time in one HSE area is six to nine months.The report also estimates that there is an 18% gap across the board between the number of care hours being provided and those required. In one HSE area only 60% of hours requested are being provided. The figures are absolutely shocking. They are shocking because services have been cut and they remain underfunded.The report finds that there was a reduction in services between 2009 and 2012 and, most acutely, between 2011 and 2012, under a Fine Gael and Labour Party Government when there was a reduction of 1.5 million home care hours.Despite the service remaining underfunded, no additional resources were allocated for home care supports in next year's budget. That illustrates a complete disregard for the value of home care. As the Taoiseach will be aware, it is one of the most important services provided within the public system. Care delivered in the home is the preferred form of care for most people and their families, particularly older people. The vast majority of older citizens want to live independently and comfortably in their own home for as long as possible. Home care packages are also vital for many with a disability or in medical need.Providing these packages makes absolute sense socially, but also economically. It saves the State money and frees up resources. Failure to provide adequate care through these packages leaves people stuck in hospitals or forced into residential facilities when they could return home. This has a knock-on effect, contributing to the trolley and waiting list crises in our hospitals as beds are occupied by those who want to, and who are ready to, return home but who are prevented from doing so.The HSE has said home support services must be delivered within the funding available. The logical solution is to make more funding available. Will the Taoiseach revisit his allocation of funding to provide for additional home care packages next year? Will he, in line with the report's recommendations, move quickly to delivering a fairer, better home care support service?All of us are agreed on the necessity of home care packages, not only their social necessity but also their economic common sense. That is not a matter of controversy. The report is very clear and the figures are not wrong. The 1.5 million hours cut from the system have not been fully replaced and there is a 16% deficit in the hours required. The report also proposes how that might be funded, saying that somewhere north of an additional €100 million must be dedicated to the service. Will the Taoiseach do that? I am sure he is familiar with this through his constituency work. I have constituents who have a home care package that amounts to half an hour per day. This is for people who are sick or have serious disabilities. One would barely have one's coat off and the kettle switched on in half an hour. It is a derisory allocation.The system has been starved of resources and the past damage has been done. Now, the repair work must start. Rather than make vague assertions, will the Taoiseach dedicate the resources necessary to meet and close that 16% gap in service provision?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-10-16	---	1	Last December the British Government signed up to a deal to avoid a hard border on our island, safeguard the Good Friday Agreement, in all of its parts, and ensure there would be no loss of citizens' rights. At the time we were told that there was a deal to provide a backstop that would recognise the unique circumstances of the North and all of Ireland in the event that a comprehensive free trade deal was not agreed to in the future. We were told that the agreed arrangement would be enshrined in an operable legal text by March. That did not happen. We were then told that the British Government would produce firm proposals by the time of the June meeting of the European Council. That did not happen either. Then the deadline became October. Clearly, that deadline is now to be breached. Yesterday the Taoiseach said negotiations could continue into next month or up to the meeting of the European Council in December. The long and the short of it is that time is quickly running out for a deal to be struck. This is a direct consequence of the British Government's prevarication and abysmal failure to produce any realistic proposal. Its latest proposal for a time-limited backstop means that, in reality, there is no backstop at all. I met the British Prime Minister yesterday and have made this point bluntly to her. I have told her that she needs to live up to the commitments made last December and that nothing less will do. I have told her that she needs to place the Good Friday Agreement, progress and the unique circumstances of Ireland above short-term political calculations and expediency.Regrettably, her toxic deal with the DUP has undermined progress. The DUP has moved from a position of trying to prevent a hard border to actively promoting one. The reality is that it does not represent the majority view of citizens in the North who voted to remain; they opposed Brexit. Those in the DUP cannot be allowed to dictate the pace of Brexit and undermine our agreements that have delivered so much for Ireland and Britain. I hope that last evening, in the course of his conversation with Ms Arlene Foster, the Taoiseach made these points to her.When he travels to Brussels tomorrow, there will be an onus on him to defend and promote an all-Ireland view and to insist that commitments made are commitments honoured. He told us last December that we had a cast-iron guarantee in respect of Ireland. Nothing less than that will do. Nothing less than that will be acceptable. I hope the Taoiseach brings that message clearly to the European Council tomorrow. Can he confirm for the House that no withdrawal agreement will be struck without a legally binding and operable backstop to protect Irish interests?While I accept all of that, it would be a mistake to create the impression that the matters which need to be agreed in respect of the Irish protocol or the backstop are simply matters of detail. The truth is that we are approaching crunch time. It is decision time. The British Prime Minister has a big historic call to make. She can decide to side with the hard-line Brexiteers and the DUP and - by accident or design - crash Britain out of Europe with all of the consequences that might follow. Alternatively, she can choose to do the right thing by Ireland by sticking to the commitments mentioned by the Taoiseach, which were freely entered into. The Taoiseach should be in no doubt that the forces which are now looking for a Brexit at any cost, regardless of the consequences for Ireland, are vociferous and strong and have to be faced down. Can the Taoiseach tell us whether there will be a special summit in November?Is that decision made? The Taoiseach seems to be accepting that the October deadline will not be reached. I agree with him on that score. What of a no-deal scenario? How prepared is the Government for that terrible vista?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-10-16	---	2	I am particularly pleased to rise to my feet in the Dáil for this Second Stage debate on the Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Bill 2018. For a very long time I did not imagine that this legislation would materialise, much less that I would be a parliamentarian speaking here in the Dáil on it. I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate and underscore the importance of the legislation to past, present and future generations of women and their families. That cannot be overstated. For decades, thousands of our women faced a lonely and traumatic journey to England and Wales to access abortion services. The shame imposed on those women and girls by the church, politicians and conservative elements in society was wrong and cruel. Since 1983, a momentum against the deeply oppressive eighth amendment to the Constitution grew in scale and support. In truth, repeal was a campaign decades in the making. As with so many other big social changes, a long and arduous journey is often followed by rapid social adjustment and change. As is often the case when it comes to civil and human rights, the truth is that the people led and the politicians followed.I take this opportunity to again record my admiration and appreciation of all of those activists, women and men, north, south, east and west, who were to become Together for Yes, to all of those who fought the good fight and who led from the front. This may have been the first big political campaign for young activists. I commend their youthful advocacy and their optimism, energy and vision for their country. I also commend the veterans, if I can use that term, people who for decades had taken a stand for women, for our bodily integrity, right to choice, right to healthcare and right to safety in maternity hospitals. There is no doubt that for a very long time those advocates and campaigners walked a very lonely path. For they and for our youthful advocates the introduction of the legislation is momentous. We divide on many things in this Dáil and I am often rightly a critic of the current Administration but I commend the Government on bringing forward this legislation.On 25 May this year, 1,429,981 million people voted to repeal the eighth amendment of the Constitution, yet today women will still travel to Britain for an abortion and their journey will still be unduly harsh despite the collective support expressed to them by the Irish people. Members of the Oireachtas now have a dual responsibility to those women. We must ensure that abortion services are available in Ireland from January next year, and that this legislation will vigorously uphold those fundamental rights the people voted for in May.We must continue to hear the concerns raised by women, their families and the medical profession on the shortfalls of this legislation. We should to open to a constructive and informed conversation. We should also be open to amendments that will strengthen the Bill in the interests of women and the medical practitioners who care for them. This legislation will shape abortion services in Ireland for decades to come. In practical terms, this is a new strand to healthcare delivery so we must get it right.This legislation will require very careful thought and deliberation on Second Stage and, more crucially, on Committee Stage. It is my hope that on Committee Stage all Members will have a capacity to listen to, comprehend and translate expert opinion, be it medical or otherwise. I hope that, if it proves necessary or useful and helpful, the experiences of women will again be considered as we craft the legislation. In the course of the debate on repeal, the experiences of women and their families who were faced, for example, with a fatal foetal anomaly, were crucial in setting the tone of the debate and deliberations. It is important that real human experiences do not get lost in a technical exercise of legislative text and amendment.To get it right we must act in good faith and with goodwill. I know there are different views on abortion across this House, and I respect that deeply, but we also know that the people, collectively, have spoken. When they repealed the eighth amendment, they did not do so in a vacuum of knowledge. The debate was well informed and created light as well as heat. In the course of the debate, Irish public opinion was aware of the general shape of the legislation that would follow. As we debate and deliberate, and as we put forth our view as democratically elected representatives, on our behalf and on behalf of our constituents, I believe goodwill demands that the legislation is allowed to proceed. I ask that we have a full, deliberative and frank debate but I appeal to colleagues not to abuse the rules, regulations and latitude of the Houses of the Oireachtas to delay legislation which already carries the democratic and approval of the people.It is important that we are inclusive of all women. I wish to include trans persons and those who identify as non-binary. For some, those are new concepts and terms, but they describe very real human beings. Regardless of income or where they live, women must be able to access services equally.There are a number of specific areas within the legislation that demand further attention and I will refer briefly to them.Section 13 provides for a consideration or waiting period of three days from when a medical practitioner certifies a woman for a termination to when she can have it. I am conscious that last month doctors, in evidence to the Joint Committee on Health, described the three-day waiting period as unnecessary and told us that it did not have a medical rationale. The decision to impose this provision within the legislation is, therefore, perhaps more political than medical. Perhaps we might reflect on the fact that it is a product of a paternalistic mindset of Governments and legislative drafters of old, a mindset that we had hoped had been set aside. This provision must be considered carefully. We must ask ourselves whether it will prove to be a barrier for women living in rural Ireland or the North of Ireland who will have to access services for the time being across the Border. The Minister and his Cabinet colleagues know that many women will not feel comfortable in seeking medical care close to home. The people may have voted to repeal the eighth amendment, but let us be realistic: there is still stigma. I want this provision to be considered and weighed very thoughtfully.I draw attention to the offences section at the front of the Bill. I note that it features ahead of the sections dealing with medical care and that bothers me. The offences section can and will create a chilling effect. The message to women's doctors is that criminal sanctions must be their first concern and perhaps the care of the women merely secondary. That cannot happen and any impression to that effect must be set to rest. I cannot imagine that this sits well with the Government. My colleague, Deputy Louise O'Reilly, has outlined Sinn Féin's view. We do not agree that medical professionals who invoke a conscience clause can be exempt from referring patients to receive the necessary medical treatment they seek. Those involved in the medical profession have raised a number of additional concerns with the Minister about the legislation and they must be listened to.We now have an opportunity to address associated areas of medical care. I welcome the Minister's commitment that abortion services will be provided free of charge. This commitment must be extended to women living in the North of Ireland who continue to be denied fundamental rights that have been secured here in Ireland and Britain. It is also time to consider equitable access to contraception for women and girls. This, too, must be free of charge. The Committee on the Eighth Amendment of the Constitution recommended the introduction of a scheme to provide contraception free of charge for all persons who wish to avail of it within the State. Committee members voiced a particular concern that personal costs of contraception could be prohibitive. They acknowledged a finding of the Central Statistics Office's general population survey in 2010 in which 18% of respondents had found the cost of contraceptives to be an issue.The discriminatory language used in the legislation must be addressed. The trans community played an important role in the repeal campaign, as did non-binary people. As communities who campaigned alongside each other for the varied rights the State has historically denied us, our struggles are interwoven. The language used in the Bill needs to reflect the diversity of society and must be absolutely inclusive in its intent. I, therefore, urge the Minister to reflect on the demands made by transgender and non-binary activists and medical professionals for the inclusion of gender neutral language. If this matter is not addressed now, we know that it will be addressed in the future after long campaigning for a right to which we already know the people concerned are entitled.I commend the appointment of Dr. Peter Boylan to assist in the implementation of arrangements for termination of pregnancy and related services. Dr. Boylan has been a tremendous champion for women's healthcare and I am sure undertook this role during the repeal campaign at some considerable personal cost. We are eternally grateful to all of the medical practitioners who campaigned alongside us, the Irish abroad who supported us, the women who shared their deeply personal stories in order that wider society could truly understand the cruelty of the eighth amendment and the new generation of activists who have emerged. The final Bill must reflect the rights secured by the people earlier this year.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-10-10	---	1	"I wish to note the loss of Ms Emma Mhic Mhathúna, who will be laid to rest today. I am sure all Members send solidarity to her family and to all those caught up in the CervicalCheck debacle.Yesterday, we were told for the third year on the trot that the budget was a housing budget. It would more properly be described as a budget for landlords. In spite of the scale of the current crisis for renters, with rents going up and up with no end in sight, the Government chose to leave them out in the cold. The budget contains no measures on rent control, tax relief for renters or security of tenure.In our alternative budget, Sinn Féin proposed that a three-year rent freeze for all existing and new tenancies be introduced with immediate effect and demonstrated how that could be achieved. However, the Government and its partners in Fianna Fáil chose to ignore that proposal. It is probably true that I should not have expected much more from the Government, given its record on housing, but last week Fianna Fáil Members voted in favour of a cross-party motion calling for the introduction of security of tenure and rent certainty. They were happy to vote for the motion but yesterday they lauded the budget and proudly proclaimed that their stamp was on it. I know a week is a long time in politics but an about-turn of that order requires some brass neck and an absolute cheek.Sinn Féin proposed the introduction of an emergency temporary tax relief, which would give back the equivalent of one month’s rent annually to each renter and put money back into the pockets of hard-pressed renters but the Government and its partner in government, Fianna Fáil, chose not to do that. The budget contains no measures to ensure rent certainty and no tax relief for renters. It contains tax breaks for landlords but not for struggling tenants, which sums up the Government's approach. Renters have again been failed by Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael but landlords get a dig out. The wrong choices and priorities again, while rents go up and up.On today's “Morning Ireland” radio programme, Deputy Micheál Martin, the leader of Fianna Fáil, told the nation that there is more to come. He stated that the Taoiseach has agreed that the finance Bill will contain more tax relief for landlords. It will have nothing for renters but lots for landlords. I ask the Taoiseach to specify what additional reliefs for landlords he has agreed with Fianna Fáil.It is neither prudent nor responsible to leave people struggling with runaway rents and to simply say to them, ""Well, the good news, folks, is that this budget provides extra resources for the RTB."" That is not what people need. It is not what people wanted to hear from the Government. There is a legitimate expectation on the part of those in the rental market and those trying to access it that they will have a stable roof over their heads at an affordable rent. We are in a housing emergency. The Taoiseach himself has conceded that point. He has conceded the fact that a huge amount of the new homelessness is coming from the private rented sector. He concedes, surely, that rents are at the highest level ever in the history of the State. On budget day, however, he sat on his hands. That is neither prudent nor responsible; it is negligent. In the selfsame budget the Government allows for mortgage interest relief for landlords. Deputy Micheál Martin, the Taoiseach's partner in government, said this morning on RTÉ radio that there is more to come, that there is another measure favourable to landlords----------and that we will see it in the finance Bill. I simply want to know what has been agreed. What is this additional measure?Answer the question.That is right, and the Government has put them in that position. Answer my question.A Cheann Comhairle, I asked a question-----May I have an answer to my question?Is that too much to hope for?Deputy Martin was wrong then."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-10-03	---	1	This afternoon, thousands of people will gather outside these gates to take a stand against the housing and homelessness crisis. This is no stunt. These are people who have studied and who live the facts. These are people taking a stand against the fact that the policies of the Government have left almost 10,000 people homeless. They are raising their voices and recording their deep outrage that almost 4,000 of those are children in emergency accommodation. How is that for a fact? These are people taking a stand against rents that are out of control and continuing to rise. They are expressing their anger that owning a home is now beyond the reach of ordinary working people, particularly younger people. These people, having studied and lived the facts, are telling the Taoiseach and the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government that enough is enough. They are demanding meaningful action now.Later today, we will debate a cross-party motion which calls on the Government to officially declare the housing crisis an emergency. The Taoiseach should do that. He should accept that we face an emergency and then act accordingly. Our motion calls for a dramatic increase in the number of social and affordable homes. This must happen. Next week's budget must mark a step change in tackling the housing emergency. The Taoiseach and his partners in Fianna Fáil need to get their heads around that and understand that more of the same simply will not cut it. The Government must double capital investment in housing and social housing. That is what we in Sinn Féin propose and what tonight's motion calls for. It is also what those outside the gates today will demand.We need delivery of 10,000 real social houses next year, as recommended by the Committee on Housing and Homelessness. We need affordable housing. The Government has not delivered one affordable home in three years and has no affordable housing targets for next year. That is some fact. We propose the delivery of 4,500 affordable homes. We must call a halt to the rental crisis. We propose the introduction of a temporary tax relief for renters and a three-year emergency rent freeze.These are just some of the measures required on budget day and the Government can deliver them. Alternatively, it can continue to live in its fool's paradise. The Government and Fianna Fáil can fool themselves, but they will not fool the people who are gathering at the gates. I ask the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, to officially declare a housing and homeless emergency and support the joint party motion which will come before the House today.I will tell the Taoiseach what we should do. Let us go out to the people at the gate in an hour's time.Let us test whose credibility is in question on the issue of housing and homelessness. It is not mine.It is the credibility of the Taoiseach, Deputy Micheál Martin and Fianna Fáil as a party.People know who the authors of this catastrophe are and they know it is not Sinn Féin. Far from acting as if we are in an emergency, the Taoiseach has been timid and a lackey to private landlords. He has sat on the sidelines in the vain hope that the market will sort it all out, even though all of the evidence tells him that the market is not sorting this out, that the State has to do the heavy lifting and that any Government worthy of the name needs to intervene in an emergency fashion. That means doubling capital investment, being bold, having ambition and ditching the Government's pathetic excuse for dealing with rent control and introducing a rent freeze. It means ensuring that the Government stops the despicable practice of landlords turfing families out to get vacant possession on properties that the State assisted these people to buy. It must stop that.The Taoiseach knows which amendment I am referring to. That is what the Government needs to do. If he is prepared to do that, he should say so and, if not, he should make that clear. Let us then go out to the gate and we will test who has the credibility problem.Yes.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-10-03	---	2	Some time ago-----Some time ago, the Constitutional Convention, the Citizens' Assembly and the representatives from the political parties alike agreed that a referendum ought to be held on extending the voting rights in presidential elections to citizens living outside of Ireland and those living in the North of Ireland. Is the Taoiseach still committed to holding such a referendum next May? There is an urgency about this issue. It has been decided that this referendum ought to take place. There is a presidential election under way as we speak but, more to the point, citizens, particularly those living in the North whom the Taoiseach correctly vowed would never be left behind again, are looking to this measure as a level of reassurance at a time of great political insecurity.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-10-02	---	1	"In an interview published in this morning's edition of  the leader of the DUP Arlene Foster had this to say:It has been deeply frustrating to hear people who voted remain and in Europe talk about Northern Ireland as though we can’t touch the Belfast Agreement. Things evolve, even in the EU context.There has been a lot of misinterpretation, holding it [the Good Friday Agreement] up as a sacrosanct piece of legislation.Such comments are not just unacceptable and wrong, they are, in fact, dangerous and reprehensible. They reveal a reckless disregard for the peace process, prosperity and progress. It should be remembered, of course, that Arlene Foster left the Ulster Unionist Party in 2003 because of her opposition to the Good Friday Agreement and it appears that the leader of the DUP has learned nothing in the intervening 15 years. It is entirely wrong to describe the Good Friday Agreement as ""a piece of legislation"" to be altered or changed on a whim. It is, in fact, an agreement between all backgrounds and strands of political outlook in the North and the South. It is a fundamental component of the constitutional landscape of this country. It is also an international treaty between this state and Britain which has been lodged with the United Nations. It is the people's agreement, not a bargaining chip. Perhaps the leader of the DUP needs to be reminded that the agreement was endorsed by the overwhelming majority of citizens on this island, by more than 70% of the electorate in the North and 94% of voters in this State. It was the first time since partition that unionists and nationalists, including republicans, had voted together in common cause. Incidentally, the second such instance was the Brexit referendum. The DUP rejected the Good Friday Agreement and embraces Brexit. On both counts it acts in defiance of the democratic wishes of the people of the North.I want to make it clear that the Good Friday Agreement is not up for renegotiation as part of Brexit. It is, in fact, sacrosanct. The best way forward for everyone on our island is not to dismiss the agreement but to embrace it. Instead of play-acting and pandering to extremes, the DUP should fully commit to the implementation of that agreement rather than seeking to undermine it. It should stop denying citizens' rights. That, of course, would unlock the pathway to re-establishing the North's institutions.Last year it was agreed that the Good Friday Agreement must be protected in all its parts. Will the Taoiseach agree with me that this is not only absolutely essential but it is non-negotiable? Will he agree with me that the Good Friday Agreement is, in fact, sacrosanct and will be protected in all of its parts?I thank the Taoiseach for that response. I echo his sentiments in respect of the achievements of the last 20 years. All of that should be acknowledged in spite of the fact the institutions are currently not operational. It needs to be acknowledged also that in order for power-sharing to work, in order for the institutions to be re-established, the spirit and the letter of the Good Friday Agreement must be embraced in their totality. I welcome the Taoiseach's confirmation that the Good Friday Agreement is not up for renegotiation or change on the basis of Brexit or to facilitate the extremes of hard Brexiteers. When the Taoiseach takes to his feet again, I ask him to respond directly to Arlene Foster, the leader of the DUP, and to insist of her, as a political leader, that she respects the Good Friday Agreement and that she, in fact, becomes part of the full implementation of that agreement."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-09-26	---	1	"As we speak nurses and midwives, members of the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation, INMO, are meeting to discuss pay and staffing shortages. The national executive of the Psychiatric Nurses Association is also meeting today to consider the recent report of the Public Service Pay Commission. For years nurses, midwives and their unions have highlighted the recruitment and retention crisis in the health service. They have proposed reasonable and responsible solutions to address it, yet there has been complete disengagement from the Government on the issue.The Public Service Pay Commission report was supposed to independently analyse and assess the crisis, its causes and how to address the problems. However, as the report conveys, the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Donohoe, met the commission in October 2017 to emphasise that its work ""is not a pay review nor can it be"". It is clear that from the outset the Government was determined that a commission mandated to investigate both pay and conditions was to focus solely on conditions and to disregard pay. It appears as if it was determined to establish the conclusions of the report long before the work had even begun. In carrying out its international pay comparisons the report acknowledges the number of nurses and midwives who have chosen to work in Britain instead of Ireland. While acknowledging the fact that pay and conditions vary across England, the report failed to address adequately differences in pay between Ireland and London specifically, a popular destination for our nurses and where entry pay is more than €3,000 higher. A pay comparison that fails to address adequately one of the most popular destinations for our nurses is flawed.Our nurses and midwives perform an invaluable service to patients in the health service and we should expect their jobs to pay well and to have high morale in their ranks. However, that is not the case. There is only one application for every four nursing and midwifery vacancies in the health service. In the meantime the Government does not wish to talk about pay, but that is the conversation that must take place. It wilfully ignores that this will only worsen the state of the health service and make it impossible to implement Sláintecare fully. All the while the bill for agency staff continues to spiral. In April, the Dáil passed a Sinn Féin motion calling for the introduction of recruitment and retention measures based on realistic proposals which would prioritise pay. It called on the Government to work with the unions to draw up a roadmap for pay equality and how that would be achieved for nurses and midwives, with an implementation plan to deliver pay equality within a short timeframe and not the eight-year timeframe the Government now proposes. Will the Taoiseach commit to acting and engaging with unions in order that nurses and other health professionals get a fair deal?The Taoiseach is not contesting the fact that there is one application for every four nursing and midwifery vacancies in the health service. That is a fact too. The fact is that we train what are said to be the best, brightest and most capable nursing and midwifery staff and then we lose them, specifically to London, Canada and Australia. When one makes a pay comparison one must benchmark the pay rate here with those destinations. Nurses and unions have said loudly and clearly that there is an issue with pay. There is certainly an issue with pay equality and then there is the broader issue of pay if we wish to recruit and retain staff. The Sláintecare report will gather dust on a shelf somewhere unless there are the resources, human resources and the capital to make it a reality.The report is being considered by the real experts. As we speak, the nurses are gathering in Croke Park and they will take a view on this report. In light of this, will the Taoiseach honour the motion passed by the Dáil, which called on the Government to engage with unions on the issue of pay and to do so in real terms in order that we can recruit and retain the best and, thus, deliver a first-class health service?No."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-09-26	---	2	I will keep it in mind. Last night the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government survived a motion of no confidence as a result of the cowardice of Fianna Fáil. Despite that, the issue of demanding political accountability for housing and homelessness is not going away. We need a huge change of direction and policy that delivers secure, affordable housing for all our citizens. In the coming weeks, we will have a referendum on the issue of blasphemy. I am sure it is a very worthy issue but it is not the most pressing one we face. A more productive course of action would be to hold a referendum on the right to housing. That would give effect to the decision by 80% of the participants in the Constitutional Convention that such a right ought to be enshrined in the Constitution. It is not a novel idea. In fact, over 80 countries across the world already have the right to a home enshrined in their basic law and their Constitution. The Government could and should provide for the holding of a referendum to enshrine a citizen's right to a home and the right to housing in the Constitution and the Government should do it without delay. It could be done on the occasion of the local and European elections in May if not before that. Will the Taoiseach take that course of action? We heard - and I agree with the Taoiseach - that empathy on this issue is not the sole preserve of any party in this House or any individual. Let us have demonstrable evidence of the Government's empathy, understanding and compassion and let us have this referendum.The convention considered all of those matters.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-09-25	---	1	By every measure, the Taoiseach's Government is failing to tackle the national scandal that is the housing emergency. Private rents and house prices continue to spiral out of control. Social housing output remains glacial with fewer real council houses to be delivered this year than last year. Not a single affordable home to rent or buy has been delivered by the Government over the past three years. An entire generation of young people, unlike their parents before them, face the prospect of never owning their own home.Since the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, assumed office, homelessness has reached unprecedented levels. Tonight almost 4,000 children will sleep in emergency accommodation and all the while the Taoiseach persists with a plan that is not only failing but is, in fact, making things worse. People know that and they are justifiably angry. That is why thousands of people demonstrated at the Take Back the City rally in Dublin last weekend. That is just a glimpse of that anger. The Irish Congress of Trade Unions' Raise the Roof demonstration on 3 October will amplify that message all the more loudly.Yet the Taoiseach and the Minister blame everyone but themselves for their failure to address the underlying issue, namely, a lack of homes. They have blamed local authorities, local councillors and opposition Deputies and I heard the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, on RTÉ radio this morning explaining away his deplorable record by saying that the numbers of people in homelessness are going up because people keep on presenting to emergency accommodation. I want to know if the Minister is now blaming the homeless for being homeless because the buck stops with him. Both the Minister and the Taoiseach are responsible but their plan is not working.The Minister claims that Sinn Féin has not offered solutions but we have offered ample solutions. We have offered solutions around investment in social and affordable housing, the introduction of a temporary tax relief for renters, alongside a rent freeze, the introduction of legislation to prevent buy-to-let landlords from seeking vacant possessions and the proposal to introduce legislation requiring local authorities to offer assistance to those at risk of losing their homes or tenancies. These are alternatives - take them and use them. Listen to the NGOs, listen to the approved housing bodies and take their alternatives and use them. It is not that no one has offered solutions; it is that the Taoiseach and the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, have refused to act and to listen. True to form, their friends in Fianna Fáil bury their heads in the sand as well.They will snipe from the ditches about a lack of housing but what will they do tonight when faced with an opportunity to vote? The answer to that is that they will do absolutely nothing.We need bold, meaningful action and we need real leadership. We need a new plan and we need a new Minister so is it not time that the Taoiseach dismissed the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy? He is quite happy to hang the prospect of dismissal over the Minister of State, Deputy Catherine Byrne, for refusing to state her confidence in the Minister but would it not be more productive and appropriate to sack the Minister for not doing his job?You poor pet.I can only surmise that the Taoiseach is delusional. It is the only conclusion I can arrive at. He seems to believe that everything is okay and that he is on track despite the facts. It is not opinion or speculation but a fact that homelessness has risen and that house prices and rents are out of control and beyond the reach even of people at work. The Taoiseach seems to be entirely immune to the fact that people are now taking to the streets and taking direct action to give voice to the anger and desperation they feel. The Government's plans are not working. The Minister has failed and is failing in his duty to the tens of thousands of people on housing lists and to the 10,000 people who are homeless. He is failing the children I referred to earlier who will sleep tonight and the next night and the night after that in emergency accommodation.We make no claim to have a monopoly on empathy but on these benches we have plenty of exposure to those families and their very real and desperate experiences yet the Government is immune to them. The Taoiseach is delusional because he stands up as Head of Government and claims his plan is working and Fianna Fáil assists the Government in that regard.The Taoiseach has failed, his Minister is failing and the desperate people with real stories who came out at the weekend want an answer from the Taoiseach and they want somebody held to account. I suggest to the Taoiseach that the person to be held to account in the first instance is the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-09-20	---	1	Táim buíoch as an deis seo labhairt ar an mBille tábhachtach seo. Gabhaim mo bhuíochas leis an Teachta Tóibín as ucht é a chur faoi bhráid na Dála, agus iarraim ar gach aon Teachta tacaíocht a thabhairt don Bhille atá ós ár gcomhair. The aim of the Bill before the Dáil is to designate certain parts of Moore Street and its immediate surroundings a national monument, the Moore Street battlefield site, as Deputy Tóibín has set out. This would ensure that the route taken by the volunteers on their evacuation of the GPO during the Easter Rising would be adequately preserved. I hope the Bill will receive the unanimous support of Deputies.Moore Street lies at the heart of my constituency. Not alone is it a street steeped in history, it is a street like no other. It is home to a street-trading tradition that goes back generations and, as I am sure everyone knows, the traders of Moore Street, the Molly Malones as they are sometimes referred to, make an unparalleled contribution to the life and vibrancy of the inner city.Among them will be found some of the finest Dublin characters one will ever meet. I am fortunate to call many of them my friends. They need to be front and centre in all plans to redevelop Moore Street in order that their tradition is preserved and their livelihoods maintained. That is essential.Alongside that, redevelopment must honour the heritage of the Moore Street quarter and the entire Moore Street terrace needs to be protected, preserved and restored. Sinn Féin's long-standing proposal to develop a historical quarter in the area would be of considerable benefit to the city both economically and socially. Unfortunately, due to countless legal battles, the development of Moore Street has ground to a halt. It has to be said that is a direct result of the actions and inaction of successive Governments. The Minister has refused to issue a preservation order for the buildings on Moore Street that this Bill identifies as compromising the national monument on Moore Street. She has refused to do this despite the Court of Appeal confirming in February that she has the power to do so.The Bill proposes to amend the National Monuments Acts for the purposes of deeming the Moore Street site a national monument. Such a move would put an end to the nonsense that has been ongoing for decades in respect of the site. As a result of the legal wrangling that has surrounded it, the entire north western end of O'Connell Street has been left in a state of disgraceful disrepair. As a result, the entire street suffers and O'Connell Street is undoubtedly not fulfilling its potential as the main thoroughfare of our capital city. Moore Street could be, and should be, a rich, vibrant cultural and heritage site that would adequately honour the legacy of the men and women of 1916. It would also serve as a catalyst for the renewal of the entire area.A large international developer holds planning permission for effectively all of the buildings on the side of the street where the national monument is located. While there has been some interaction between the developer concerned and the ministerial advisory forum, this has been limited. The planning permission could be enacted at any time which means that the buildings listed in the Bill, except 14 to 17 Moore Street, would be threatened with destruction. We are told the Minister has refused to take the necessary preservation order because all stakeholders are interacting on the ministerial advisory forum. A preservation notice is not incompatible with that forum, which will not make or accept any decision that is not fully in sympathy with national monument status. The Minister needs to understand that and to take it on board.We need the Government to step up and put in place proper safeguards for the Moore Street quarter. The Minister should do the right thing and issue the preservation order. If she does that, the Bill could be withdrawn. If she does not, we will have no option but to persist with our campaign to see to it that the Dáil acts instead. Similarly, the campaign outside will continue. As I conclude, I commend the work of the Save No. 16 Moore Street Committee and the 1916 relatives group over the years. I fear that without their tireless advocacy Moore Street would have been irrevocably lost and damaged. As a result of their tireless work, we have an opportunity to do something different and meaningful, and to do what we should, which is the right thing. Iarraim ar gach Teachta tacú leis an mBille atá romhainn.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-09-18	---	1	The summer has seen the housing and homelessness emergency go from disaster to calamity. According to the most recent homelessness figures, the number of homeless individuals now stands at nearly 10,000. The number of families accessing emergency accommodation stands at 1,778, which is 349 more than in the same month last year. Scandalously, the number of homeless children has increased again. There are now 3,867 children sleeping in emergency accommodation. Service providers have been reduced to referring families to Garda stations owing to the lack of emergency accommodation. In the course of the summer we witnessed the indignity of a family of seven sleeping in Tallaght Garda station. Rental costs have spiralled out of control; house prices remain above affordable levels and tens of thousands of homes lie vacant across the State. Naturally, people have responded and some have come out to protest against the Government's failures. The response has been a heavy-handed overreaction to the peaceful occupation of a building in my constituency which had lain empty for three years. Staff of a private security firm arrived in unmarked cars escorted by gardaí to evict a handful of peaceful protestors, which was an absolutely disproportionate response. I ask the Taoiseach to contrast that with the Government's response to the housing crisis which has been underwhelming, under-resourced and inadequate. The Government's flagship housing policy, Rebuilding Ireland, has been in place for two years, but the crisis has deepened. Instead of getting to grips with the emergency, the Government has attacked local authorities and Opposition Deputies and failed to see its own failures. Spin over substance and a refusal to accept that its policies are failing are the hallmarks of the Government's approach. We need a change of direction and a change of policy desperately. That means taking bold and urgent action. I have such an action to recommend to the Taoiseach. Sinn Féin has proposed the introduction of a temporary tax relief for renters, alongside a three-year emergency rent freeze. Existing tenants would have their rent frozen at current levels, while new tenants would have their rent pegged to the Residential Tenancies Board's average rent index. This would be a good move and a partial response to the crisis we face. Will the Taoiseach introduce such a rent freeze?The CPO process is long and arduous.The Taoiseach says the Government is doing everything to increase supply. It is not. I had occasion to visit a fantastic social housing scheme in Cherry Orchard and an affordable scheme in Ballymun. I spoke to the approved housing bodies about their analysis of the current situation. They both said they cannot understand all the blockages, delays and red tape being placed in their way by Government. In fact, some of them speculated and asked me whether the Government has some big announcement or whether there is a rabbit to be pulled from the hat. The fact is, sadly, that there is not. The truth is that when one talks to these approved housing bodies, the story they tell is one of delay and prevarication.I put to the Taoiseach the idea of a rent freeze. This is a very necessary mechanism to prevent more homelessness. We know that the bulk of people now coming into homelessness, including family homelessness, are coming from the private rental sector. The Government's approach, including its pressure zones, has not worked. We need something that is fit for purpose. I am not inviting the Government to tinker around the edges of anything. On the contrary, I am asking it to take decisive action. I put it to the Taoiseach again that the Government needs to introduce a rent freeze. I hope that what Fr. Peter McVerry described as a conflict of interest that might be on the Government's benches and on those of its colleagues in government in Fianna Fáil will not prevent it from introducing something as necessary as a three-year rent freeze.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-07-11	---	1	It has become clear that the Government has no sense of urgency or seriousness in addressing the CervicalCheck scandal. Instead of pursuing a genuinely victim-centred approach, it has opted to manage and contain the matter. An authentic approach would have put the affected women and their families first in a dedicated and comprehensive manner, rather than in a piecemeal way involving mere words, but that is certainly not happening. Delay and obstruction have been the overriding themes of this scandal and of the Government's handling of this most serious matter. Women are still being forced to go through the courts to access vital information from their medical records. The essential review of 3,000 cervical smear slides has not yet begun. In addition, the final report of the scoping investigation will be delayed. It is important to remember that the scoping exercise was supposed to be a fast and sharp inquiry, mindful of the fact that many of the women in question will become very sick. As we know, women have died. Sadly, some women are now dying. As recently as last Thursday, Fine Gael voted against a Sinn Féin Bill which sought to make open disclosure mandatory. I think that says it all. It says that the Government has not really prioritised this matter and does not really have a sense of the urgency that is required to deal with the issues being faced by these women and their families. To add insult to injury, we understand from campaign groups that women are not being given full and complete information on how to access the €2,000 assistance payment. We are being told that women are being sent into an information cul-de-sac by the HSE and the Department of Health. It has been reported today that only those expenses incurred since 11 May last can be recouped and recovered, which is crazy. The Taoiseach might confirm whether this is true. If it is true, it means that no account is being taken of the considerable expenses and loss of earnings incurred by some of the women who are at the centre of these cases. Yesterday, I raised the imperative of establishing an independent patient advocacy group, specifically for these women and their families. I am raising these issues again today because I am mindful that this is the last occasion on which the Taoiseach will take Leaders' Questions until September. When will the review of the 3,000 smears begin? When does the Taoiseach expect Dr. Scally to report? Will he recall the Dáil, if necessary, when the Scally report is published to establish the commission of inquiry? When will the independent advocacy group for the women and their families be established?The Taoiseach has not told me when the examination of the 3,000 slides will begin. I could also reflect on the Taoiseach's confirmation that the Scally report will be produced in its own good time. I am not challenging the process, which has to be independent.I would have thought that a Government that understood the urgency and seriousness of these matters would give one direction to Dr. Scally and every agency concerned, namely, to proceed with urgency and efficiency. The Government should resource those carrying out the work so this can be achieved. Members will know that the Scally team had great difficulty in accessing information from the HSE in the first instance. I will not revisit all that.More importantly, I want the Taoiseach to indicate to the affected women when the 3,000 smear test slides will be examined. When will the commission of inquiry be established? Is it a certainty for September? I want the Taoiseach to tell me what he is going to do about the fact that women still cannot gain access to their medical files. I want him to state how it is defensible, given everything that has happened, that women are still forced into the courts to fight their corner to get their information.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-07-11	---	2	"The ""This is Me"" campaign held a rally on Saturday last. This campaign is part of a grassroots campaign to improve transgender healthcare in Ireland. While progress has been made globally in this area, in this State the treatment of trans and non-binary communities leaves a lot to be desired and the current healthcare system is not fit for purpose and is letting citizens down.It is my understanding that the Gender Recognition Act has been reviewed and that the report is due to be published soon. While the indications are that the review calls for extended gender recognition for trans youth and non-binary persons, which is positive, we will be in a space that the law recognises and embraces our LGBTQ+ identities but our healthcare system does not. Despite the Government claiming otherwise, our healthcare system does not comply with World Professional Association of Transgender Health, WPATH, or World Health Organization, WHO, standards. Will the Taoiseach commit to achieving this adherence to international standards in the provision of healthcare following the Gender Recognition Act review?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-07-10	---	1	"Over the weekend we watched as yet another calamitous chapter in the Tory Brexit debacle unfolded. Two years on from the Brexit referendum, the British Government produced a three-page document. The world was told that it represented a unified approach to Brexit in the British Cabinet. As we now know, that narrative began to unravel on Sunday evening with the resignation of Mr. David Davis as Brexit Secretary. His departure from office was followed yesterday afternoon by the resignation of the British Foreign Secretary, Mr. Boris Johnson. A chief architect of Brexit, he has decided to run away from the mess he helped to create. I dare say a man who equated the Border in Ireland with boundaries between boroughs in London will be no great loss.Despite all the drama and the toing and froing in London in the past couple of days, we should make no mistake that the problems for Ireland remain. They are real and present. We still have no workable solutions from the British Government or legal guarantees from the British Prime Minister, Mrs. Theresa May, on the political agreement made last December which the Taoiseach may recall that he described as ""cast-iron"". The Tory Party tactic has been to play for time.They have been openly reneging on the backstop or protocol for a while now. The Chequers document only makes a passing reference to a backstop. Speculation is that the White Paper, publication of which we await, will contain something similarly vague. To add to this, Mrs. May confirmed to the House of Commons yesterday that she would not sign up to the December agreement and backstop. That cast-iron agreement, as the Taoiseach put it, is a non-runner according to Mrs. May.Obtaining legal guarantees that protect Ireland's interests, North and South, is essential. A new Brexit realism would understand how essential it is to bring clarity and certainty for our people, our all-island economy and our agreements. A new Brexit realism would understand that the backstop agreed in December is the bottom line. The Taoiseach cannot concede. There cannot be any flexibility, no blurring or softening of the lines on this matter. I believe the Taoiseach cannot continue to accept bad faith from the Tory Government.We cannot allow these matters to slip into the hazy days of the summer and sit back and hope for the best. My questions are straightforward. What is the Taoiseach's plan now to ensure that Ireland obtains the necessary legal guarantees from the British Government? Will he now call for a special EU summit before October focused on achieving solutions and answers to the Irish question?I am not confused at all. I am clear that the political agreement in December found legal expression in the protocol drafted in March. I am clear that from the moment and hour the British caught sight of it, they have consistently rejected it.Here is what we need clarification on. The British would say we need a backstop.In other words, they disavow what was agreed to in December, in effect, by rejecting the March protocol. Is the Taoiseach telling us that, as far as he is concerned, that protocol is still open for negotiation? Is that the message he is giving to the Dáil? Is he on the same page as the British Government in arguing for a protocol, rather than the text that was agreed to in March? It is extremely disturbing and very dangerous if that is the case. The protocol, as drafted in March, is the bottom line. It is the bare minimum required to achieve the objectives set out by the Taoiseach. We know that the British have consistently rejected the March protocol. Will the Taoiseach tell us what is the position of the Government? Is the protocol the finished item which he wishes the Government to sign on for, or is there another one? Is it still open for negotiation in his mind?I beg to differ."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-07-04	---	1	Fáilte ar ais. I want to raise with the Taoiseach the comments that he made in New York at what has been described as a private lunch but what I understand was an event paid for by the Irish taxpayer. His remarks, as published, referred to the Irish media. He has confirmed these remarks in part, that he is in sympathy with President Donald Trump and that he believes that Irish journalists have no interest in the truth. No more than the rest of us, as Taoiseach and Head of Government, I am sure he understands that the freedom of the press to report in the public interest without coercion, pressure or undue influence is vitally important and yet he has attacked Irish investigative journalism and he has cited RTÉ in particular. It is interesting that the Taoiseach cites the very programmes that have exposed scandals such as the hospital waiting lists, the disregard for carers and those with disabilities, the failure of the State and the Taoiseach's Government to protect children in care, and the wholesale failure of his housing policy, and we heard again not only about homeless children but also the scandal of a generation that has lost any hope of ever having a secure roof over their heads. The Taoiseach knows that time and again citizens have had to resort to media platforms to get the ear of Government and of Ministers and yet he has a problem with investigative journalism.I suggest to the Taoiseach that if he is genuinely concerned about the Irish media, he might have remarked on the issue of media ownership in New York. He might have also been particularly concerned about the power of Denis O'Brien in Ireland's media landscape. He might have reflected that Mr. O'Brien's dominance has a chilling effect on news gathering and reporting in the public interest and on the ability of journalists to get to the truth. Had the Taoiseach said that, he would have had broad agreement here and from most journalists, but he is not interested in those legitimate issues. He simply wanted to have a go.From the paid for content scandal earlier this year to the controversy surrounding his €5 million spin unit, the Taoiseach's interest seems to be in spin and optics. Will he tell us who was at this lunch? Will he publish or provide the names? Is there a record of the meeting? What else was discussed? Did he have any other commentary to make on other sections of Irish society and would he care to share those views with us?That account of events directly contradicts what those who were at the event are reported to have said. The report reflects commentary by the Taoiseach in which he accuses the media of trivialising matters, and chasing tittle-tattle rather than being concerned with substantive issues. A direct attack on investigative journalism, on RTÉ investigative journalism in particular, is very clear in the recording. The problem is that the Taoiseach is saying one thing, while those who were in attendance say another. Will he tell us how we can fully and finally clarify these matters? The Taoiseach says he is concerned about the health of the media in Ireland. In that context, I would have thought the issue of media ownership would have been the obvious, stand-out issue, but the Taoiseach chose not to address it.What other issues were discussed? Did the Taoiseach comment on other sections on Irish society outside of the media?It differs from the accounts of others.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-07-04	---	2	I do not know if the Taoiseach is deliberately missing the point that is being raised. It is not a case of the media being above criticism. Of course they are not, nor should they be. For the purposes of clarity, is the Taoiseach telling us that the commentary attributed to him was wrong? Is the Taoiseach suggesting that the people who reported his comments were being deliberately misleading? Is this the Taoiseach's position? This seems to be what the Taoiseach is suggesting. Why on earth would people do that? The Taoiseach has not denied the fact that he aligned his views with those of President Donald Trump but the Taoiseach is rather coy in putting some detail around it. Which part of President Trump's analysis does the Taoiseach share? The Taoiseach and his Government have not in any way answered the issue around concentration of media ownership. Anybody looking at the Irish media landscape would immediately say this is the glaring issue that needs to be addressed.What part of the Trump analysis did the Taoiseach agree with in his commentary at the event in New York? The Taoiseach is hardly suggesting that people have made these things up, or is he?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-07-03	---	1	"I wish to raise with the Tánaiste the ongoing scandal of children with scoliosis being left on surgery waiting lists. The four-month target has been missed for 88 children who are in dire need of an operation, some of whom have been waiting more than three years. Those children live in agony and are unable to live a full life. Their parents are frustrated and exhausted from battling the system. They are worn out fighting for access for their children to vital medical treatment and life-changing surgery, which is a battle they should not have to fight.Those who watched the ""RTÉ Investigates"" programme entitled ""Living on the List"" did so in horror and grief. It provided a harrowing insight into the daily struggles faced by these children and their families. The Tánaiste may recall that in the aftermath of the programme, the Minister for Health offered apologies and made promises. Those promises have been broken for 88 children, whose days from when they get up until they go to bed are filled with extreme pain and discomfort. I cannot imagine what it must be like for a child to endure that suffering. It is hard to imagine what it is like for the families of those children to watch as the phoney war, which we have seen again this afternoon between the Taoiseach or the Tánaiste and Deputy Micheál Martin is played out. The meaningless, egotistical jousting between the Taoiseach and Deputy Micheál Martin is not new. Rather, it is a feature of the relationship between Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil since they partnered up following the 2016 general election. Of course, Fianna Fáil seeks to mask its support for a Fine Gael-led Government------------and Fine Gael policies and budgets by picking sham fights. It keeps the Government in power while faking outrage over the results of the disastrous policies it helped to implement.It is incredible that the leaders of the government arrangement choose to focus their energies on these tiffs rather than the serious issues that need to be addressed, none of which are more serious than the issue I raise today with the Tánaiste. People do not want to see self-indulgent fisticuffs over who is the biggest boy in the schoolyard.People want solutions. The Taoiseach and Teachta Micheál Martin need to cop themselves on and focus attention on the 88 children who are desperately in need of surgery. What does the Tánaiste say to the children who await this surgery and their parents? When will those 88 children have their operations?The Tánaiste and his friends in Fianna Fáil have provided the type of stability that means children grow up in bed and breakfasts and hotels and an entire generation of people have given up on any aspiration to owning their own home or even having a stable and assured roof over their heads. That is some kind of stability.The progress he brags about has left 88 children still in need of surgery. Some of them are waiting much longer than four months but all of them have seen the promise of a maximum wait of four months blown to smithereens and not realised. What has the Tánaiste to say to the parents of those 88 children and when will those 88 children be seen to? A straight answer to those questions might bring us somewhere close to the reality that these families do not want rhetoric, statistics or long lists of the Government's perceived virtues. The Tánaiste is aware that self-praise is no praise. These 88 children and families want to know when they will be cared for and when they will get the services they need and to which they are entitled. I would like a straight answer to that question if the Tánaiste can give it."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-06-27	---	1	"I wonder should I click my heels and say: ""There's no place like home.""The process undertaken by the Policing Authority is now complete and Mr. Drew Harris is to be appointed as the new Commissioner of An Garda Síochána. It is significant that somebody from the North, a serving PSNI officer and former RUC officer, has been appointed to this position. I met Mr. Harris and the Chief Constable of the PSNI, Mr. George Hamilton, in Belfast two weeks ago. For our part, we will continue to pursue comprehensive policing reform. We want to work constructively with the new Commissioner and we will hold him to account, as we have with previous Commissioners.I acknowledge that Mr. Harris comes to this job with his own story of loss and pain from the conflict in the North. That cannot be minimised in any way; Mr. Harris lost his father. What also cannot be minimised or sidelined are the concerns raised by victims of British state collusion, such as those expressed by Stephen Travers of the Miami Showband on the radio this morning. Mr. Travers spoke of RUC collusion and the old RUC culture of political policing and cover up. He regards Mr. Harris as part of that culture which has denied people the truth. Similar concerns have been voiced by representatives of the Relatives for Justice campaign group. They say that Mr. Harris ""has at every opportunity sought to thwart families in the search for truth and accountability"", and that he ""has had a stranglehold on legacy and has acted partially and with vested interest at all times"".The issue of Mr. Harris's evidence at the Smithwick tribunal being described as ""nonsense"" by a former Garda Commissioner has also arisen. The question of any intelligence to which Mr. Harris had access in terms of British state collusion in the Dublin and Monaghan bombings has also arisen.Did the Taoiseach hear Stephen Travers on the radio this morning? Has he read the statement from Relatives for Justice? I believe it is appropriate for the Taoiseach to acknowledge and respond to the concerns they have expressed. Mr. Harris's main job must be to deliver radical reform of An Garda Síochána, and to develop an ethos of transparency, best practice and accountability. To do this, he must first earn the confidence and trust of the public, particularly regarding his involvement with legacy cases. He has to demonstrate that he in no way subscribes to the toxic, vindictive policing culture which necessitated the disbandment of the RUC.How does the Taoiseach respond to Stephen Travers? What assurances can he give that the new Garda Commissioner will play the part demanded of that office in exposing collusion, uncovering truth and holding those responsible to account?I am sure the Taoiseach will agree that in order to bring about that radical transformation of policing, the new Garda Commissioner must have public confidence and that is what I am asking the Taoiseach about. Yesterday I raised with him the case of Pat Finucane. Many times we have raised incidents, not least the Dublin and Monaghan bombings, where British state collusion was writ large. The fact of collusion is well established and accepted at this stage. However, families and individuals have been actively thwarted and blocked in their search for truth. They have said it out loud. Let us pretend we did not hear what Stephen Travers had to say. He said that at this point - before Mr. Harris even assumes his new role - he is raising incredibly serious questions about confidence in the incoming Garda Commissioner. The Taoiseach needs to answer that.I want to know what he has to say to Stephen Travers and to the other families.I want to hear that from the Taoiseach, as Head of Government. It would also be appropriate for Mr. Harris to make a statement addressing those issues of confidence - those real and deep-seated concerns - because we all know that reform of An Garda Síochána----------has to work. This has to succeed. For it to succeed, the incoming Commissioner must enjoy public confidence.The Garda Commissioner."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-06-27	---	2	Although we are in the middle of the summer, the perpetual trolley crisis continues. Dr. Emily O'Connor, the spokesperson for accident and emergency consultants, is quoted this morning as saying that extra beds were promised but that there is no sign of them. Since the Taoiseach took office, 106,694 people have spent one night or more on a hospital trolley. I am sure the Taoiseach will agree that this is scandalous. A comparison of bed numbers from the health service capacity review, published only a few weeks ago, and the capacity review from 2008 shows that there are about 1,000 fewer beds in the health service now. The Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation, INMO, is on record as stating that approximately 1,000 beds were closed due to cuts and the recruitment and retention crisis. When will we see real action to tackle the main issues of the trolley crisis? I refer to addressing capacity through reopening beds, addressing the recruitment and retention of staff, providing adequate step-down facilities, home-care packages and proper investment in primary and community care.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-06-26	---	1	Cuirim fáilte roimh Mr. Robin Newton. I also give a special welcome to Mr. Paddy Agnew, a former Deputy for Louth, who is in the Public Gallery. He was elected to the Dáil 37 years ago on an anti H-Blocks ticket. This is the first time he has been in Leinster House. I am sure everybody will extend a warm welcome to him. We are delighted he is here. It took him a while but he got here in the end.It has been confirmed that in the first financial report of the year released by the Department of Health, the Health Service Executive, HSE, recorded a deficit of more than €100 million in January and February of this year. Based on that trend, it is likely that the half-year deficit will fall somewhere between €220 million and €300 million and it might be double that for the year as a whole. It is against that backdrop that I want to raise the scandalous spending on agency staff in our health service. Figures released to my colleague, Deputy Louise O'Reilly, show that every day in 2017 the HSE spent more than €800,000 on agency doctors, nurses and other staff to fill positions that have been left vacant. That is close to €300 million for the year as a whole. That is, as the Taoiseach will agree, a colossal amount to spend on the hiring of temporary staff, which is always more expensive than directly employing personnel. It is a big strain on the health budget.When we look at the roles temporary staff are filling, the extent of the problem becomes apparent. A total of €105 million spent on hiring agency doctors and dentists and that figure has doubled since Fine Gael came into office in 2011. Some hospitals' dependency on agency staff is mind-boggling. Letterkenny University Hospital spent more than €9 million on agency doctors, Midland Regional Hospital Portlaoise spent €8 million and University Hospital Limerick spent more than €5 million.There is also a severe crisis in nursing. More than €64 million has been spent on hiring agency nursing staff. There is no doubt that these staff perform a necessary function but the reason hospitals are reduced to relying on such costly agency staff is that the Government and the HSE have failed to address the recruitment and retention crisis. Health staff and the unions have consistently reported working conditions, facilities, supports, training opportunities and pay as the causes of the crisis and until these issues are addressed, we will continue to squander large amounts of public moneys in the way I have described. This is bad for workers. It is certainly bad for patients because it compromises continuity of care.In April a Sinn Féin motion was passed in the Dáil which called for the introduction of recruitment and retention measures based on realistic proposals and which prioritised pay. It called on the Government to work with the unions to draw up a roadmap to full pay equality. Having done nothing thus far, will the Government now commit to acting on that motion in order that our nurses and other health professionals get a fair deal and we can end this ridiculous and excessive use of public money in the health service?I am not asking the Taoiseach to do anything other than to engage in wise and prudent use of public moneys. If, however, it is his view that there is not a crisis in the recruitment and retention of medical staff, particularly nurses, I must inform him that there are lots of people working on the front line who would strongly disagree with him. I am putting the simple proposition to the Taoiseach that €300 million spent in a calendar year on the recruitment of agency staff does not represent good value for money. I am suggesting that there are things that need to be done to address that situation. This is a long-running problem. I have given the Taoiseach figures for 2017, but we could go back further and identify the same problem.We have to decide that we are going to give our nurses, for example, a fair deal, that there will be full pay equalisation and that, having trained the best and brightest, we are not content any longer to allow them to emigrate, thereby losing all of their skill and expertise. Can the Taoiseach indicate in concrete terms how he proposes to address this situation? It is not just a case of how much money is spent. We could debate the overall resourcing of the health service on another occasion. I expect that we are on different sides of that argument. It is not just a case of how much money is spent, it is a question of how it is spent. Agency staffing is clearly not an optimum, desirable or prudent solution.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-06-21	---	1	Cuirim céad míle fáilte roimh Uachtarán Juncker. On my own behalf and on behalf of Sinn Féin I extend a very warm welcome to President Jean-Claude Juncker on his heroic return to the city of Dublin. Mr. Juncker has asked us to hang and weigh each of his words carefully and I have followed his advice. I am happy to respond, as we meet at this crucial time for Ireland in the course of Brexit negotiations.As has already been reflected upon, Brexit is perhaps the greatest threat or challenge to our island in a generation. It is a threat to our peace agreements, our peace process, our stability, our prosperity and to the rights of Irish citizens, South and North, North and South. The potential for Brexit to cost jobs, to damage our industry and to damage and endanger the welfare of our people cannot be overstated.Brexit is best understood as a Tory vanity project. It certainly was not designed to emancipate the masses. The Tories regarded the Working Time Directive as a menace to democratic freedoms, so any suggestion that such a political mindset had any real intention of making a difference for the working class and the common good in Britain or anywhere else is entirely misguided.We need to acknowledge that mistakes and failures in the European project have bolstered the arguments of those who argued for Brexit, and they succeeded. I put it to President Juncker that the economic dogma of the market above all else has alienated citizens and that this needs to be acknowledged. The increasing militarisation of our European Union, the democratic deficit, the distance between the core and the periphery, the distance between larger member states and smaller member states and the onward march towards federalisation by stealth are all legitimate matters of concern. The case for a very radical reform is now unanswerable. This is not simply a case of more Europe, it is in fact a plea for better Europe, for a Europe that commits itself to social solidarity, democracy, fair play and a sense that the citizens are in charge and have ownership of this thing we call the European project. For this to happen the establishment and the politicians need to give way and make space.I hope that when we reflect on the experience of Brexit that we will have the collective wisdom, from whatever political perspective we come, to reflect collectively and take Shaw's advice that to mark progress we need to challenge our thinking. Europe, on many central issues, needs to change not just its mind but also change its direction.Whatever way we come at these things, I believe we can agree that Brexit is a disaster and especially for those of us in Ireland. The Tory Brexiteers held their entire debate without any reference at all to Ireland. This arrogant and detached attitude has persisted in these negotiations. Mrs. May and her Government have yet to put forward any realistic or workable proposals. Instead, the Brexit policy of the British Government remains littered with longstanding contradictions. The Tories claim that they are committed to avoiding a hard border, but they remain intent on dragging the North of Ireland out of the European Union, out of the customs union and the Single Market. They claim there is no threat to the Good Friday Agreement whilst undermining that very agreement and ignoring the fact that there are 142 areas of cross-Border co-operation that will be adversely impacted. The British Government insists that the rights of people living in the North will not be eroded. That is disingenuous, as the Tory Brexiteers are insisting the North leaves the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice, and perhaps worse, sets out a scenario of withdrawing from the European Convention on Human Rights and that court.Sinn Féin has highlighted these fundamental contradictions many times, not least when our friend Mr. Michel Barnier addressed these Houses. That was more than one year ago and yet these matters remain unresolved to this day. The outworking of these unresolved contradictions in British policy is absolutely clear. As it stands, the British position would impose a hard border on our island. This is a fact. As it stands the British position would erect barriers to east-west trade. This is a fact. As it stands, British policy is to undermine and damage the Good Friday Agreement. That is a fact. These are regrettable and unacceptable facts.Last December the people of Ireland were told that we had a cast-iron guarantee that all of what I have described would not happen, and that in the event of a no-deal scenario there would be no hard border on our island, no diminution of citizens' rights and no damage to the Good Friday Agreement. The backstop was to be our insurance policy to prevent the imposition of World Trade Organization trading rules if negotiations ended without a comprehensive agreement. We were told that this draft agreement would be converted into a legally binding text in March. This did not happen. The British Government delayed and distracted with nonsensical non proposals and it refused to commit. Instead, earlier this month and as a last minute effort perhaps to spare its blushes, the British Government dreamt up another proposal that would scrap the backstop proposal that was agreed in December and that would leave our island with zero legal assurances. I am sure that I do not have to say it to President Juncker that it is absolutely essential that we have not just words and kind sentiment; we need legal protection.I ask that President Juncker publishes the promised annexe to the backstop that would set out the protection of citizens' rights. This is in the gift of the European side and it would be helpful and reassuring for us to see it. Sinn Féin has argued, and there is a wide consensus, as to what Ireland needs. We need the North to remain in the customs union and the Single Market. We need to ensure that the rights of citizens, particularly the citizens living in the North of Ireland, are protected and acknowledged. Irrespective of the wilder ramblings and rantings of exotic Tories, we need to ensure that our peace agreement is respected in full: every letter, every dot and every comma.I am happy to hear President Juncker reiterating a policy of Ireland first, but when I met the British Prime Minister yesterday she set out a policy of Ireland last, if at all. It seems clear that British policy and tactics are to run down the clock and to delay and delay again. We are most disappointed that, despite an assurance that the Irish question would be answered in advance of setting out the details of the new relationship that Britain wishes to foster with the European Union, this has not happened. It is dangerous for us and brings jeopardy to us if the British are allowed to go into the European Council meeting at the end of this month, refuse to agree on or answer the Irish question, and emerge with something of a diplomatic triumph in a statement that we will move to the next phase of the negotiations. I have shared this view explicitly with our colleagues in government. At the Council meeting, the British Government needs to be called out on its antics and the position of Ireland first that President Juncker referenced needs to be explicitly stated to Ms May. It needs to be made clear that the British Government will not roll the Irish question into its new relationship in an attempt to pressurise this country into accepting a bad and potentially calamitous deal for the island of Ireland.It is clear that the Brexiteers still cannot agree what Brexit means, much less what it looks like. That is their problem and cannot be ours. The upcoming Council meeting cannot simply be another exercise in kicking the can down the road. This is crunch time. In the absence of the British demonstrating how they would avoid a hard border, uphold the Good Friday Agreement and protect citizens' rights, it is reckless to allow talks to progress to the next phase. I ask President Juncker and Mr. Barnier to please not make that mistake. The future of the people living on this island is on the line, and history will not judge kindly anyone who decides to ignore the import of this reality. History remains the business of tomorrow and it can be shaped by the decisions that we make today. The present provides us with the opportunity to do the right and responsible thing. The position of Ireland first and Ireland now articulated by President Donald Tusk and President Juncker must be the guiding principle for the European Union team. That is the duty of the EU and the Irish Government. I hope the EU does not blink and fulfils this mission.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-06-21	---	1	Cuirim céad míle fáilte roimh Uachtarán Juncker. On my own behalf and on behalf of Sinn Féin I extend a very warm welcome to President Jean-Claude Juncker on his heroic return to the city of Dublin. Mr. Juncker has asked us to hang onto and weigh each of his words carefully and I have followed his advice. I am happy to respond, as we meet at this crucial time for Ireland in the course of Brexit negotiations.As has already been reflected upon, Brexit is perhaps the greatest threat or challenge to our island in a generation. It is a threat to our peace agreements, our peace process, our stability, our prosperity and to the rights of Irish citizens, North and South. The potential for Brexit to cost jobs, to damage our industry and to damage and endanger the welfare of our people cannot be overstated.Brexit is best understood as a Tory vanity project. It certainly was not designed to emancipate the masses. The Tories regarded the working time directive as a menace to democratic freedoms, so any suggestion that such a political mindset had any real intention of making a difference for the working class and the common good in Britain or anywhere else is entirely misguided.We need to acknowledge that mistakes and failures in the European project have bolstered the arguments of those who argued for Brexit, and they succeeded. I put it to President Juncker that the economic dogma of the market above all else has alienated citizens and that this needs to be acknowledged. The increasing militarisation of our European Union, the democratic deficit, the distance between the core and the periphery, the distance between larger member states and smaller member states and the onward march towards federalisation by stealth are all legitimate matters of concern. The case for a very radical reform is now unanswerable. This is not simply a case of more Europe, it is in fact a plea for better Europe, for a Europe that commits itself to social solidarity, democracy, fair play and a sense that the citizens are in charge and have ownership of this thing we call the European project. For this to happen the establishment and the politicians need to give way and make space.I hope that when we reflect on the experience of Brexit that we will have the collective wisdom, from whatever political perspective we come, to reflect collectively and take Shaw's advice that to mark progress we need to challenge our thinking. Europe, on many central issues, needs to change not just its mind but also change its direction.Whatever way we come at these things, I believe we can agree that Brexit is a disaster and especially for those of us in Ireland. The Tory Brexiteers held their entire debate without any reference at all to Ireland. This arrogant and detached attitude has persisted in these negotiations. Mrs. May and her Government have yet to put forward any realistic or workable proposals. Instead, the Brexit policy of the British Government remains littered with longstanding contradictions. The Tories claim that they are committed to avoiding a hard border, but they remain intent on dragging the North of Ireland out of the European Union, the customs union and the Single Market. They claim there is no threat to the Good Friday Agreement whilst undermining that very agreement and ignoring the fact that there are 142 areas of cross-Border co-operation that will be adversely impacted. The British Government insists that the rights of people living in the North will not be eroded. That is disingenuous, as the Tory Brexiteers are insisting the North leaves the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice, and perhaps worse, sets out a scenario of withdrawing from the European Convention on Human Rights and that court.Sinn Féin has highlighted these fundamental contradictions many times, not least when our friend Mr. Michel Barnier addressed these Houses. That was more than one year ago and yet these matters remain unresolved to this day. The outworking of these unresolved contradictions in British policy is absolutely clear. As it stands, the British position would impose a hard border on our island. This is a fact. As it stands the British position would erect barriers to east-west trade. This is a fact. As it stands, British policy is to undermine and damage the Good Friday Agreement. That is a fact. These are regrettable and unacceptable facts.Last December the people of Ireland were told that we had a cast-iron guarantee that all of what I have described would not happen, and that in the event of a no-deal scenario there would be no hard border on our island, no diminution of citizens' rights and no damage to the Good Friday Agreement. The backstop was to be our insurance policy to prevent the imposition of World Trade Organization trading rules if negotiations ended without a comprehensive agreement. We were told that this draft agreement would be converted into a legally binding text in March. This did not happen. The British Government delayed and distracted with nonsensical non-proposals and it refused to commit. Instead, earlier this month and as a last minute effort perhaps to spare its blushes, the British Government dreamt up another proposal that would scrap the backstop proposal that was agreed in December and that would leave our island with zero legal assurances. I am sure that I do not have to say it to President Juncker that it is absolutely essential that we have not just words and kind sentiment; we need legal protection.I ask that President Juncker publishes the promised annexe to the backstop that would set out the protection of citizens' rights. This is in the gift of the European side and it would be helpful and reassuring for us to see it. Sinn Féin has argued, and there is a wide consensus, as to what Ireland needs. We need the North to remain in the customs union and the Single Market. We need to ensure that the rights of citizens, particularly the citizens living in the North of Ireland, are protected and acknowledged. Irrespective of the wilder ramblings and rantings of exotic Tories, we need to ensure that our peace agreement is respected in full: every letter, every dot and every comma.I am happy to hear President Juncker reiterating a policy of Ireland first, but when I met the British Prime Minister yesterday she set out a policy of Ireland last, if at all. It seems clear that British policy and tactics are to run down the clock and to delay and delay again. We are most disappointed that, despite an assurance that the Irish question would be answered in advance of setting out the details of the new relationship that Britain wishes to foster with the European Union, this has not happened. It is dangerous for us and brings jeopardy to us if the British are allowed to go into the European Council meeting at the end of this month, refuse to agree on or answer the Irish question, and emerge with something of a diplomatic triumph in a statement that we will move to the next phase of the negotiations. I have shared this view explicitly with our colleagues in government. At the Council meeting, the British Government needs to be called out on its antics and the position of Ireland first that President Juncker referenced needs to be explicitly stated to Ms May. It needs to be made clear that the British Government will not roll the Irish question into its new relationship in an attempt to pressurise this country into accepting a bad and potentially calamitous deal for the island of Ireland.It is clear that the Brexiteers still cannot agree what Brexit means, much less what it looks like. That is their problem and cannot be ours. The upcoming Council meeting cannot simply be another exercise in kicking the can down the road. This is crunch time. In the absence of the British demonstrating how they would avoid a hard border, uphold the Good Friday Agreement and protect citizens' rights, it is reckless to allow talks to progress to the next phase. I ask President Juncker and Mr. Barnier to please not make that mistake. The future of the people living on this island is on the line, and history will not judge kindly anyone who decides to ignore the import of this reality. History remains the business of tomorrow and it can be shaped by the decisions that we make today. The present provides us with the opportunity to do the right and responsible thing. The position of Ireland first and Ireland now articulated by President Donald Tusk and President Juncker must be the guiding principle for the European Union team. That is the duty of the EU and the Irish Government. I hope the EU does not blink and fulfils this mission.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-06-19	---	1	The Health Information and Quality Authority, HIQA, report on the operation of the Child and Family Agency, Tusla, which was brought by the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Deputy Zappone, to Cabinet has just been published. As we know, the report was initiated on foot of Tusla's catastrophic mishandling of allegations made against Garda whistleblower, Maurice McCabe. I understand the report is damning and outlines dysfunction and deficiencies within Tusla in the areas of staffing, systems, reporting and governance. I understand it highlights the alarming reality that Tusla has serious difficulties in recruiting and retaining specialist staff, in particular, social workers. The report also points to resourcing problems and the inability of Tusla to respond appropriately to cases of alleged or suspected child abuse. The unacceptable result of this catalogue of failure is that the Child and Family Agency is not adequately protecting children at ongoing risk. This means that children are knowingly being left in danger.The Taoiseach may recall that when I raised the horrific Galway foster home rape case with him in April, I said the State's failure of children was a damning indictment on our political system. I also said it would not be long before we would be back here to discuss yet another failure, and here we are. There are children at increased risk today due to the culture of dysfunction in Tusla. This has been compounded by the Government's failure to act and properly resource a responsive and effective Child and Family Agency. It is clear that we need to see a radical step change when it comes to recruiting and retaining social workers. In January last, the Committee of Public Accounts highlighted the high staff turnover rates at Tusla. Despite hiring 250 new staff, the net gain was only 18 due to the high numbers of staff leaving the agency.This is an issue we have raised time and again with the Minister. In May we learned that over 4,000 children referred to Tusla were waiting to be allocated a social worker. We need to see dramatic improvements, but we also need to see accountability for the litany of failures contained in today's report. In order to change the culture in Tusla there first has to be accountability. All of this is happening on the Taoiseach's watch. The diagnosis is clear: Tusla, as it stands, is not fit for purpose and what we now need are solutions to ensure the children at risk will be properly protected. What does the Taoiseach plan to do to address the chronic shortage of social workers in the system? The HIQA report published today was commissioned a year ago. The Government and all of us knew at that stage that there were very big problems. We also know that a year is a very long time in the life of a vulnerable child. What measures were taken in the interim to minimise the danger to children at ongoing risk?The McCabe incident which, of course, we are not going to discuss here triggered the report and investigation, but the difficulties in Tusla were well known and had been well recorded in advance of them. What is of deep concern is what seems to be the scale of the systems failure within the agency on matters people would regard as the basics.It is not that sophisticated systems seem to have failed here but that even the basics were not right in terms of reporting, recording and proper communications and standards.I appreciate that an action plan will be published. I understand it will be made public and will be available on the Tusla website. I assume the Taoiseach and the Minister are giving an absolute commitment to ensure the action plan is actioned. However, a question remains on the issue of accountability and I ask the Taoiseach to address it. I will study the report carefully but I understand it catalogues massive failures at every level. I want to know who is to be held accountable for that.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-30	---	1	This morning, Irish society is once again faced with a scandalous mistreatment of citizens, particularly women and children, by the State as we stare face-on into the scandal, not of incorrect registrations but of fraudulent, deliberate mis-registration and illegal adoptions. Yesterday, the Minister, Deputy Zappone, confirmed what so many previous Governments had known for decades. She finally revealed that 126 babies were illegally adopted from St. Patrick's Guild between 1949 and 1969. These babies had their births falsely registered to their adopted parents. They are, as we speak, in the dark as to where they came from. At the weekend, we thought we had finally closed the door on the historic mistreatment of women at the hands of a conservative state and yet today that door is wide open again.Swift action must now be taken to right what is another grave injustice. I acknowledge that the Minister has taken the initiative. However, it must be said that successive Governments have known of these scandals and yet they failed to name them and act, despite ample documentary evidence. Campaigners have been raising these issues with successive Governments since at least 2002. In fact, they raised the specific matter of St. Patrick's Guild in 2003 with the then Fianna Fáil children's Minister but no action was taken. Over the years, the Adoption Rights Alliance has raised the specific issue of illegal adoption with successive Ministers, with the joint Oireachtas committee and with the Adoption Authority of Ireland. In fact, the Adoption Rights Alliance, in dogged pursuit of answers and action, issued a paper which gave prominence to illegal adoption to each Minister at the Department of Children and Youth Affairs since 2011 and yet no significant action ever followed. It is only now, in 2018, that we are finally seeing some movement.There are citizens who were illegally adopted but have absolutely no idea that they are adoptees. Many have lived for decades unaware of their identities and with no access to their records. This has practical consequences in terms of health care and hereditary conditions. They live under a closed secret system that stigmatises their very existence. Many will want to know who their birth parents are and now it might be too late. That is unforgivable.I understand that the Taoiseach has proposed an investigation and I want to ask him specific questions regarding what is proposed with the aim, the scope, the resourcing and the terms of reference. Does the Taoiseach accept that these were illegal adoptions? Will the Government include all agencies, individuals and homes involved in adoption in the State? Will the Government include the estimated 2,000 babies who were illegally sent to the United States of America? Will the Government ensure that no affected person is left behind?The Taoiseach is quite correct that this is not about retribution but what those affected tell me is that they want, above all, honest and that is why language matters here. It matters that we do not try to minimise what happened. It matters that we do not try to pretend that it was an accident, that it was a clerical error.It was deliberate, fraudulent and illegal and robbed the children, their mothers and natural families of rights so innate to any person that it hurts almost to think of what they lost. They were illegal adoptions. It is important to use that term because the campaigners tell us that is how they see it. Does the Taoiseach accept that what the Minister, Deputy Katharine Zappone, has revealed thus far is just the tip of the iceberg? Yesterday's revelations account for one agency. We estimate that there were 182 such agencies. While initially a sampling exercise might be necessary, a sampling exercise, in and of itself, will not cut it. Only a complete survey of all adoption files will get to the bottom of this scandal. Will the Taoiseach commit himself and his Government to it?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-30	---	2	"In the wake of the CervicalCheck scandal, officials from the HSE and CervicalCheck appeared before the Committee of Public Accounts and in evidence CervicalCheck's programme manager, Mr. John Gleeson, denied that anyone in CervicalCheck has misled the State Claims Agency by informing it that the women who are the subject of the audit had been informed. This happened in the context of preparation for Vicky Phelan's trial.The State Claims Agency has now informed members of the Committee of Public Accounts that Mr. Gleeson's assertion, to use its phrase, does not tally with the facts. It says that it was in fact told by CervicalCheck that all of the women subject to the audit had been informed. We know that this was not true. It also emerges that, in fact, it was Mr. John Gleeson himself who had given this misinformation to the State Claims Agency. We can only conclude that Mr. Gleeson did not tell the truth to an Oireachtas committee. Indeed, Vicky Phelan's solicitor has described all of this, as the Taoiseach will know, as a ""cover-up"".Just so the Ceann Comhairle understands-----Let me perfectly give the Ceann Comhairle another piece of information to accompany what I have said to the Taoiseach. It is that the response from the State Claims Agency, to which I have referred and in which it said that the assertion made at the committee does not tally with the facts, is on the record and in the possession of a committee of the Oireachtas, so these are not facts or assertions of my making. Can I put my question to the Taoiseach?Thank you. A question then arises on the investigation being carried out by Dr. Gabriel Scally. How can Dr. Scally have confidence in carrying out a thorough investigation in the spirit of transparency that we were promised when it now emerges that CervicalCheck and senior officials, far from acting in a spirit of transparency, are, in fact, it seems continuing with what Vicky Phelan's solicitor described as a ""cover-up""?No, I do not.No, I do not."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-29	---	1	"Saturday was a momentous day for the people of Ireland. We voted overwhelmingly to remove the eighth amendment from the Constitution. We said in a strong and unified voice that we would no longer tolerate Irish women being treated as second-class citizens. We said we trusted women to make the best decisions on their pregnancies and healthcare. We demonstrated the instinctive compassion of the people. We said loudly that we were no longer willing to stand over a system that made exiles of women in crisis. The people led and the politicians followed. By voting ""Yes"", the people showed us their vision of what they wanted their country to be - progressive, equal, fair and kind. It is important to commend the Citizens' Assembly, as the Taoiseach has done.I commend the Together for Yes group for the fantastic work it carried out and acknowledge those who have campaigned for 35 years to achieve this result. I also acknowledge those in this House who spoke out on the issue of abortion when it was not easy to do so.The campaign is now over and the people have spoken. Our attention as elected representatives now turns to the job of enacting legislation. It is crucial that we get this done without delay and that we get it right. I appreciate that there are complexities in meeting the three objectives of passing sound legislation, drafting and agreeing clinical guidelines and enacting medical regulations. This work needs to all happen in tandem. We have to remember that between now and the enactment of legislation, women in crisis will still face the same challenges they did before the referendum was passed. In the interim, as we await the legislation, a positive and necessary step is the immediate repeal of the Regulation of Information (Services Outside the State for Termination of Pregnancies) Act 1995, the abortion information Act. That would allow doctors to make referrals for women and to confer with doctors outside the jurisdiction about the care of women who will still be forced to travel for terminations. Repeal of this Act would at least offer women some degree of support and confidence. By working together constructively, we can pass the necessary legislation promptly. I hope every Member of the Oireachtas will act constructively and will recognise the decision of the people. The people have played their part and now it is up to us as legislators to play ours.Given the timeframe the Taoiseach has outlined, will he commit to working with us to ensure the 1995 abortion information Act is repealed immediately? In respect of citizens living in the North, can he make a commitment that Brexit will not disrupt access to the services in the way he has described?Yes.I am not proposing this discrete move, as the Taoiseach described it, as being optimum. The optimal situation is that we could move the legislation within a matter of weeks and give immediate effect to the will of the people. We all accept, however, that is just not possible and, in any event, we have to be sure-footed in the drafting of the new legislation.The bottom line is that women and girls will still fall pregnant. Some of those pregnancies will be in crisis circumstances, such as, for example, a diagnosis of a fatal foetal anomaly. The fact is that those women and girls will still have to travel. That situation will pertain until the law is changed which the Taoiseach envisages to be early next year. We cannot leave women in the impossible situation that they leave by boat or plane with a telephone number in their pockets without their medical files. That is an intolerable situation. I am suggesting as a mitigation - it is nothing more than that – that we ensure, at a minimum, that women or girls who still have to make the journey can do so with the advice, the care and the assurance of their doctors with their medical files in a joined-up and caring way. That is the least we could do.While I accept the decriminalisation issue is urgent, in the practical outworking of this for women, I think this is the priority legislation. Will the Taoiseach keep an open mind on this matter? It is a necessary move and I believe, if there is goodwill, we could clear the decks. It is a simple matter of repeal. It is straightforward enough technically. When does the Taoiseach propose to talk to the Leaders of the Opposition on matters such as this?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-23	---	1	"Prior to this referendum campaign, many people did not know of the existence of abortion pills, much less the frequency with which Irishwomen were ordering them online and consuming them with absolutely no medical supervision. The Department of Health estimates that every day three women and girls consume these abortion pills. It is a story that has featured but has not been openly expressed in the public domain in the course of this campaign, not least because the consumption of the pills carries with it a potential criminal sanction of 14 years' imprisonment.This morning I had the pleasure of meeting Ms Elaine Bedford, who is from Killester in Dublin. She has now stepped into the public light to tell her story and that of her daughter, Kate. Kate was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes at the age of seven. As she got older, she suffered from polycystic ovaries and was prone to infection. From the age of 11, when she hit puberty, she was always warned against unplanned pregnancy because of her diabetes. In late 2016, Kate became very ill. Her mother tells me that she spent three days and nights in intensive care at Beaumont Hospital. She recovered from that. The following year, she fell pregnant. It was not a planned pregnancy. At that stage, Kate was 25 years of age. She was frightened. She felt cornered and snookered and believed she had very few, if any, options. She decided on abortion pills. Elaine recounted today, in the most graphic detail, the experience of her daughter consuming these pills at home alone. She said Kate took the tablets at home, was in agony and was bleeding. Kate seemed to move in and out of consciousness and Elaine could not lift the telephone to tell the doctor because Kate was terrified of that. Elaine said this hell continued for three days, with pain and bleeding. Kate's boyfriend and her mother took shifts to look after her. Elaine told me she will never forget the fear and panic in her daughter's eyes. She said that no mother should ever have to see that fear in her child's face.Kate is not alone, as we all know. Women take these pills alone, scared and in silence. They do so knowing that the eighth amendment prevents them from gaining access to the medical care they need. The result is women bleeding in their beds unable to seek help, daughters pleading with their mothers not to call the doctor out of fear, and loved ones watching on wondering how bad the situation might get. Nobody should ever be left in that position. I am sure the Taoiseach will agree with me. I hope everybody in the Dáil agrees with me on this point. I ask the Taoiseach to speak to Elaine, Kate and the women and girls who will consume abortion pills today.Kate will turn 27 in October. Her mammy says she is a good girl. She is still a girl at 27. She is on her honeymoon but she will be home to vote. She is going to vote ""Yes"".There is a fundamental question for all of us as citizens, but particularly for all of us as legislators, on this matter. It boils down to this: are we prepared to look the other way as Kate and hundreds and thousands of other women take abortion pills in circumstances that we know are unsafe?Are we prepared to do that as the legislators for this jurisdiction and as people who have responsibility to shape thoughtful, responsive, inclusive public policy? I am not. I am not prepared to look the other way. Elaine, Kate's mother, is not prepared to look the other way. That is the challenge for people as they, in good conscience, arrive at their decision on Friday. Do we look the other way? Do we create this jeopardy, this threat, to the health and potentially to the lives of our women and girls?The Taoiseach has been out on the campaign trail, no more than the rest of us, and I know he has spoken to countless parents - fathers and mothers - as I have, who told him that their greatest dread is the thought of their girl taking an abortion pill in their bedroom in silence and loneliness."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-23	---	2	Yesterday a Dublin mother, Jackie Fox, made a presentation to Oireachtas Members in the AV room. She told Members of the campaign of physical and online bullying that led her daughter, Nicole, to take her own life. I was not in attendance for the briefing because I was in the Chamber, but it was very well attended. Those in attendance heard Jackie make one request. She asked that the law be updated to ensure the Garda would be able to prosecute those who cause harm or self-harm through online bullying. Specifically she called on Oireachtas Members to amend section 5 of the Non-Fatal Offences Against the Person Act 1997 to include the crime of digital harassment. This proposal was a key recommendation from an Oireachtas committee report on cybersafety for children and young adults published in March this year. Does the Government intend to introduce legislation to provide justice for those suffering from digital harassment and for parents like Jackie Fox?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-22	---	1	"I also extend our solidarity and condolences to the communities, friends and above all the families of Ana Kriégel and Jastine Valdez, a girl and a young woman who have lost their lives so horribly and cruelly. We can only imagine the feelings and heartbreak of their loved ones at this most difficult time.Three days from now, the people will go to the polls to vote on whether to repeal the eighth amendment. The only way we can help women facing crises is by returning a ""Yes"" vote and removing the eighth amendment from Bunreacht na hÉireann. In the course of this debate, it is important that we deal in fact. I have heard assertions from the ""No"" campaign and its spokespersons that what they call hard cases - for example, pregnancies resulting from rape or those involving diagnoses of fatal foetal anomalies - can be dealt with under the current constitutional framework. Such assertions are patently untrue. The very same people making this argument campaigned against the Protection of Life During Pregnancy Act 2013. That Act, now widely recognised as being wholly inadequate, allows doctors to intervene only where a woman's life is a risk. At that time, the people to whom I refer talked about the floodgates being opened and abortion becoming widely available. They were wrong on that matter just as they are wrong now not to acknowledge that the eighth amendment blocks any action to legislate for what they call the hard cases. How do we know this? We know it because we have tried.Two separate Private Members' Bills on these issues were rejected on the advice of the Attorney General. Therefore, there is only one way we can help women in these circumstances and that is by returning a ""Yes"" vote on Friday, and to suggest otherwise is entirely disingenuous.It is important also to remember that these are not exceptional or really hard cases; these are real women facing devastating scenarios and circumstances every day. The eighth amendment represents a real and ongoing threat to the health and lives of Irish women. It places the threat of criminal sanction against doctors for making medical decisions in the best interests of the health of their patients. Those are the facts. On Friday, we have what I regard as a once-in-a-generation opportunity to right a historic wrong, to learn from the misery - the alphabet soup of misery, the litany of misery - that the eighth amendment has brought us.People are now being told that repeal of the eighth amendment will mean a free for all, with unrestricted access to abortion, abortion for no reason and abortion until birth. I ask the Taoiseach to address these false assertions and to set the record straight.I thank the Taoiseach. I share his view that not alone hard law but bad law has given rise to so many hard cases. He wonders, not unreasonably, how it is that those who contend there is another route to deal with these cases have not come forward with that proposition.There is no proposition because it is not legally possible unless we repeal the eighth amendment.There are some people who believe that a woman should be forced to continue pregnancy in any set of circumstances, even when doing so will have a devastating impact on her health, or might even claim her life, or if there is no chance of the child surviving and all the heart-breaking trauma that comes with that unbearable situation. On the face of it, their message might sound somewhat sympathetic to somebody who might be a victim of rape but beyond the soft words there is no substantive response other than to say that she made her bed so lie on it, that the woman should continue come what may. It is an astonishing lack of compassion and demonstrates an astonishing lack of trust in our women. I am glad that the Government and people across these benches have chosen to turn away from that lack of compassion and choose instead another route and way. Will the Taoiseach specifically address the false assertion in respect of very late abortions, which is being advanced by some in the ""No"" campaign?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-09	---	1	Mr. Tony O'Brien told a meeting of the Joint Committee on Health earlier today that he will not be standing down as director general of the HSE. While Mr. O'Brien was making that declaration, I received a call from Emma Mhic Mhathúna from Kerry. She asked me to raise her case with the Taoiseach. Emma is 37 years old and is the mother of five children aged between two and 15 years of age. She received a clear result from a smear test in 2013 but she now knows that the result was, in fact, a false negative. She received a diagnosis of cervical cancer after a routine smear test in 2016. She only learned of the false negative for the previous test as this scandal has unfolded.She wants the Taoiseach to know that she is terminally ill, that she will present on Friday for a medical assessment at which she expects she will be given an estimate of how long she is expected to live. Emma wants the Taoiseach to know that she has been told to get her affairs in order and to make provision for her five children. Emma is extremely angry. She says her faith has been shaken to its core. She tells me that her anger outweighs even her fear of dying. She wants the Taoiseach to know that she wants accountability. She has asked me to tell him that she cannot understand why he is sitting on his hands. She cannot wrap her head around why he has not done the very first thing that is needed to ensure the start of accountability. I told the Taoiseach yesterday, as I have said before, that people outside of this place see two Irelands: they see a well-paid senior public executive sitting in a committee room brazening things out and then they see a terminally ill woman in her living room who knows she does not have much time left, who knows - or at least suspects - that it could have been very different and who is left wondering how her children will cope.I could make all the political reform arguments in the world as to why Tony O'Brien must go; I have made some of them previously. I could make all the good governance and public policy arguments as to why this man needs to go. We could go back and forth on that all day long. However, that all pales into absolute insignificance when one compares it with what a woman like Emma is feeling and articulating today. The buck must stop somewhere and accountability must start somewhere. Emma has no confidence in Tony O'Brien, the public and the women and families affected have no confidence in Tony O'Brien, the Opposition has no confidence in Tony O'Brien and three of the Taoiseach's own Cabinet members have said he should stand down, yet the Taoiseach and his Minister for Health refuse to act.When the Taoiseach gets to his feet, I do not want him to answer me; I would like him to speak to Emma. I want him to answer Emma Mhic Mhathúna. I want him to explain to her why he is allowing Tony O'Brien to continue as usual, why he refuses to hold him to account and why he is ignoring her voice.Nobody wants accountability more than Emma or other women and families in her circumstances. I do not believe the Taoiseach's response, to be blunt. What I see is a person who leads the Government and who knows well what needs to happen and what is the right thing to do. I do not dispute the sequence of events and share the Taoiseach's view that the most egregious offence was the withholding of information. We cannot with all certainty state whether in each case the withholding of that information had a material affect in diagnosis and subsequent treatment. Let others decide on that. What Emma told me is that she sees the Taoiseach, the leader of Government, fail her. Has it occurred to the Taoiseach that women like Emma might not be around to hear the results of these inquiries? Mr. O'Brien has eight or 12 weeks left, depending on when he takes his leave, but who is to say how long Emma has? She has a very simple request of the Taoiseach, and it is a challenge to him as Head of Government because it is something that we do not do in this jurisdiction. The Tony O'Briens of this world do not stand down, and Governments here do not sack them or tell them to clear their desks. She wants to see the start of accountability now. That means the departure of the man in charge of the HSE, the director general with whom the buck stops. It is as simple and clear cut as that.Those are disgraceful remarks. The Taoiseach is dodging the question.That is the Taoiseach's answer to Emma?He does not want to answer. He is shamefaced.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-09	---	2	The programme for Government contains a range of commitments to young people, their schools and their communities. The collapse of Carillion has had a negative effect on these commitments on two fronts. First, schools building projects awarded to the Carillion consortium face indefinite delay, despite some work being near completion. These are not the only projects stalled as a result of the company's collapse. Projects awarded to Sammon are also in jeopardy. In my constituency our local GAA club, Naomh Fionnbarra, was directly affected with subcontractors walking off site in January due to non-payment. There is less than two weeks' work left to complete with just a pitch to be laid - a pitch which is sitting in the subcontractor's warehouse - and minor fencing and lighting work to be completed. It was hoped that with Sammon, the main contractor, now in examinership a speedy resolution could be found. However, I learned yesterday that the Minister for Education and Skills has, in effect, fired Sammon and now intends to retender for this minor work, delaying its completion for at least another four months. That work would take literally days to complete. I ask the Taoiseach if the Minister for Education and Skills can reconsider this decision to retender and instead find a more reasonable, more proportionate and timelier solution.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-05-08	---	1	I join the Taoiseach and every other Member in extending sympathy to the family and friends of the late Monica Barnes and to her colleagues in Fine Gael. She was one of the political women I used to look at as a child with some considerable admiration. The Taoiseach will forgive me for saying the following, which I want to put in the right way. She did not really come across like a Fine Gaeler, at least not to me. I mean that as the highest compliment to her, not that some of the Members opposite are not also lovely. She was a committed feminist in every respect, a woman's woman and a courageous voice. Is it not something that just weeks before we go to the polls hoping to remove the eighth amendment, we recall that she was one of very few who stood against it when it was first proposed? She was one of the few who had the foresight, compassion and vision for women to take a very courageous stance at the time.I never met Monica Barnes and I am sorry that I did not know her. She represents a huge loss to her family. She had a considerable political career at a time when women were even rarer than we are now in the places of legislation and decision-making. Ireland and the world more generally are better for having had her and I am sure her family and friends are bereft at her loss. I am happy on my behalf and on behalf of Sinn Féin to pay our respects to her memory and to offer our condolences on the death of a very great woman.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-08	---	2	By now the Taoiseach will be aware of the harrowing story of Mrs. Irene Teap. Mrs. Teap was twice given incorrect cervical cancer screening results, in 2010 and again in 2013. Two years later she was diagnosed with stage 2 cervical cancer. Irene Teap died in July last year. She was 35 years old with her whole life in front of her. She has left behind a heartbroken husband, Stephen, and two young children. Irene died not knowing that she had received two incorrect smear test results. She died not knowing that she could have benefitted from earlier medical intervention.I understand that Mr. Teap has spoken with the Tánaiste, Deputy Coveney, who conveyed his feelings and listened to what Mr. Teap thinks should happen.He is quoted in today's  as saying:I want Tony O’Brien gone and to help get rid of the panic that’s out there. Tony O’Brien cannot remain on while an investigation into CervicalCheck takes place.Mr. Teap's words echo the same sentiment and message as those of Vicky Phelan when she asked how Tony O'Brien has the neck to stay in his job. The fact that the Taoiseach continues to back Mr. O'Brien sends a very negative message to the victims of this scandal and the public more generally. People look on and see the old boys' club that runs this State protected at all costs. The old boys' club is protected even when the lives of women have been placed in the gravest of jeopardy by its members' catastrophic failures. Now, despite Mr. O'Brien's gross incompetence and his failures, the political establishment is seen to circle the wagons around him. Earlier the Taoiseach spoke of the feelings of hard-working staff within the HSE. The Taoiseach's refusal to hold Mr. O'Brien to account does them the gravest disservice of all. Telling the women of Ireland not to worry because Mr. O'Brien will soon take his annual leave simply does not cut it. In fact it is downright insulting. It deliberately misses the point.We tabled an amendment to the Rural Independent Group's motion seeking to create an opportunity tonight for Deputies across the House to debate and to vote on whether this Dáil has confidence in Mr. O'Brien. We should not have to do this but we have had to because the Taoiseach and his Minister for Health have failed to lead from the front. His Government refuses to act and now the Dáil has been silenced on the matter. The Taoiseach said that he would listen to women and their families. He said they would be front and centre in all of his efforts. I now challenge him to be true to that promise, to start the process of accountability, to tell us that he has no confidence in Tony O'Brien and to tell him to vacate his post.This is not simply a question of looking for heads, as the Taoiseach puts it; this is a matter of seeking and securing accountability. I said to the Taoiseach in my remarks that he told us - I understood this in good faith - that he would put the women and families who have been devastated by this scandal front and centre. I am now asking him to demonstrate his bona fides in that regard. Those concerned have said that, for them, the first step in achieving accountability is to hold Mr. O'Brien to account. That is what they want and that is what the Tánaiste has been told. So far, it seems we are going around in circles. On the one hand, the Taoiseach critiques the HSE and its leadership but, on the other, he is not prepared to act and lead from the front. That is his job. It seems to people looking in from the outside, not least the women and their families, that Mr. O'Brien is absolutely untouchable - untouchable even though wives have been lost to their husbands, untouchable even though mothers have been lost to their children, untouchable even though life itself has been lost to women, and untouchable even though the man has patently and clearly failed in his duties. I want to know what the Taoiseach is going to do about that today.The only thing that has any credibility or that will honour the Taoiseach's promise to listen to the women and their families is for him to state clearly - as, I understand, members of his Cabinet have stated today - that he has no confidence in Mr. O'Brien, that Mr. O'Brien must go, that Mr. O'Brien is not part of the solution and that, in fact, his leadership of the HSE has been part of the problem.They have done so.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-02	---	1	"Vicky Phelan's solicitor has been adamant in his description of the behaviour of the HSE in regard to his client. He has described it as a cover-up. To be honest, I was not 100% sure if that was the right description but I am now. I am now convinced that we are faced with a cover-up by the HSE and for the following reasons. We and the general public were previously led to believe that all smear tests were subjected to a review where a woman later developed cervical cancer having had a clear smear. Some 208 women was the final number put into the public domain. Then last night the Minister, Deputy Harris, came into the Dáil and told us that ""a potentially considerable number of cases were not subjected to audit"". We are now advised that approximately 1,500 more women, who may have been put at risk because of errors in the reading of their smear tests, are now affected. Another 1,500 women potentially were left in the dark just as Vicky Phelan was.In the midst of a debacle centred on the withholding of vital information by the HSE - life and death information - we are now told that there was more misinformation and that more women are potentially caught up in this scandal. This is breathtaking, Taoiseach. It is increasing evidence that this controversy is not simply a case of catastrophic dysfunction; it is a case study of deceit of the gravest nature. Simply put, Taoiseach, this is a national scandal. It is a national scandal enabled by a toxic culture within the HSE. Notwithstanding any inquiry, if we are to ensure that this does not happen again there must be accountability and wide-ranging change in the HSE and this needs to start at the top. Notwithstanding the fact that we do not as of yet have not only all of the information but some of the most basic information that one might expect, we know that Tony O'Brien has presided over negligence, concealment and misinformation, with the most serious consequences for women and their families and so he cannot remain on as director general of the HSE. This is the very least that women affected and their families need to see happening.Let us be clear. This was not a communications mess-up or, as Mr. O'Brien put it, a failure to close a communications loop. This was a deliberate and devastating concealment of vital information to protect the management of the HSE and, ultimately, the State in court. Women had a medical test read incorrectly. This information was known to the HSE yet these women were kept in the dark for years, deliberately. This organisational mindset does not develop by accident; it is the product of toxic leadership. In any other walk of life, the person ultimately responsible for any such scandal would lose his or her job.The Taoiseach is the boss and the buck stops with him. I put it to the Taoiseach, as I did yesterday, that he must remove Tony O'Brien from his post.As a woman, there is absolutely no chance of me not going for a cervical smear test. I believe this reflects the view of the majority of women who are very well versed in the necessity to care for their health and the efficacy and value of screening. The Taoiseach should not repeat that again to avoid answering the questions that have been put. He said it might have been a cock-up. That might be his view, but it was some cock-up that left women without information to which they were entitled, information that affected their lives and the medical treatment they might seek. It was subsequently kept from families when women deceased. We know of 17 women so far, but I dare say there were more. It is quite a cock-up. The withholding of the information was not accidental. It was clearly the policy and the strategy of the HSE to keep it from women and their families. How do we know this? We know it because Vicky Phelan and her legal representatives painstakingly and painfully established the facts in her case via the courts. She is not on her own and not unique.Mr. Tony O'Brien's contract finishes in a couple of weeks. I put it to the Taoiseach as head of the Government that it is a scandal that Mr. O'Brien will be left in his post for those weeks to sail off into the sunset with a large pension and a hefty gratuity, leaving a scene of devastation, upset and trauma behind him. If the Taoiseach is serious about providing leadership on this matter and reassuring women across the State, he would do the first thing that needs to happen - to remove that incompetent man from the position he holds."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-02	---	2	I want to ask the Taoiseach about the serious incident management team conducting an audit into CervicalCheck. I understand the audit formed the basis of a report presented yesterday evening to Tony O'Brien, who is still director general of the HSE. Given the level of confusion and misinformation that has marked this sorry episode, the report should be made available to Members.I also want again to register my huge anger and bemusement that far from Mr. O'Brien being dealt with and removed from his post, not alone will he go off with his pension and a gratuity but he is being facilitated in the way previously described to participate on a board and receive fees for that in a manner that is a clear conflict of interest. That offers an interesting perspective on the Taoiseach's style of government and his attitude as head of Government, not least to the women of this country.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-05-01	---	1	"Today people are trying to make sense of how profoundly the State has failed the women affected by the cervical cancer scandal. A total of 208 women went for a vital screening for a life-threatening illness and were wrongly given the all clear, of whom 162 were not told about this devastating error. I understand some of them have still not been contacted, but if I have that wrong, the Taoiseach might correct it for me. Of course, for some of the women affected by the scandal there will be no telephone call, no news, no disclosure and no truth because 17 of them are dead. They passed away not knowing that their cancer should have been caught earlier, that their treatment programmes, prognosis and possibly outcomes could have been different. They died unaware that this information was known to the HSE and others. They had been kept in the dark, not because of some communication error but because of a toxic culture of concealment within the HSE and a refusal to take responsibility, a culture in which women were literally allowed to die before fault was admitted. Vicky Phelan's solicitor has described what he regards as a cover-up within the HSE.The root of the scandal is found in the decision in 2008 to outsource screening. At the time the Government was told of the dangers of this move, that it would jeopardise women's' health and their lives, but it went ahead with it. Subsequently the flaws in the system were highlighted, not least by members of the quality assurance committee. Members of that committee resigned in protest because their words had fallen on deaf ears. They had fallen on the deaf ear of Mr. Tony O'Brien, formerly of CervicalCheck and now chief executive officer of the HSE. He knew this information but did nothing about it. His position is untenable and he needs to go. If he does not, the Taoiseach needs to sack him-----I have named names and repeat that the Taoiseach should sack the named individual. Of course, we would know nothing about this scandal were it not for the bravery of Vicky Phelan which the Taoiseach has acknowledged. She is terminally ill and was coerced and harassed through the courts by the State in her fight to get to the truth.The legal strategy pursued by the State and stood over by the Government was shameful. The State bullied her and then tried to silence her. This cannot happen again to any woman or any family that takes the State to task for its failures in this scandalous episode.The Taoiseach has said that he defends the right of patients to know the full facts about their own health. The fact is that he has opposed a mandatory duty of candour. He failed to support it as Minister for Health in 2015 and he failed to support it again in February of this year when he was questioned by my colleague, Deputy O'Reilly. His failure in this area reinforces the State's strategy, which is to withhold information, to dodge liability and to aggressively face down patients - women, in this instance - and their families.What we see here is concealment, harassment, cover-up and death. I have three questions for the Taoiseach.When did he become aware that there was an issue with the cervical cancer screening programme, particularly the review carried out in 2014?Is the Taoiseach prepared to support the introduction of a mandatory duty of candour? Will he remove Mr. Tony O'Brien from his position immediately?Do not underestimate the level of public understanding of the importance of screening. Women know full well that cervical screening and BreastCheck are essential parts of their healthcare. That is not a matter of public debate. We also know they are not diagnostic and there is no ""100%"". Furthermore, we know that in these cases, information was deliberately withheld from women and their families. That is the issue.The Taoiseach tells us the first he heard of all this was on Thursday or Friday last week. I presume he is referring specifically to Ms Phelan's case. The Taoiseach was the Minister for Health in 2014. Is he saying he knew nothing about the audit or the review of the CervicalCheck scheme at the time as Minister for Health? What was his state of knowledge at that point in terms of the screening approach and, more particularly, the initiation of this audit and its findings?The Taoiseach did not answer my question on the matter of a mandatory duty of candour. I find that very surprising as he went to some lengths to say that women and patients have a right to full information. Will the Taoiseach clarify the position? In the past the Government blocked a mandatory duty of candour and I want to hear that the Taoiseach will now support it as Head of Government. Will the Taoiseach also answer my question on Mr. Tony O'Brien, head of the Health Service Executive? Does the Taoiseach have confidence in him, because I certainly do not? Will he do what is glaringly apparent and relieve Mr. O'Brien of his duties?That is not what I asked."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-04-25	---	1	"There is trouble in paradise; the Government parties have fallen out.It has started in more ways than one.Yesterday, I raised with the Taoiseach the issue of leniency in the sentences handed down for sexual crimes against women and children. In response, the Taoiseach gave his support for our call for the introduction of sentencing guidelines. I urge him and the Minister for Justice and Equality to support Sinn Féin's amendments to the Judicial Council Bill.As the Taoiseach is aware, I raise these matters on foot of an RTE ""Prime Time"" programme aired last night which centred on the case of three young girls who were raped by Keith Burke while in the care of a foster family in County Galway. Shock, heartbreak and anger best describe the reaction of the nation - shock at what the girls were subjected to and anger because of the way in which the agencies of the State, particularly the Health Service Executive, utterly failed to protect the children.In 2007, Rachel Barry disclosed to the HSE that she had been abused by Keith Burke. Her disclosure was judged to be credible by a subsequent HSE investigation. Rachel also disclosed that a second young girl known as Amy had been raped by Burke. A file was sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions, DPP, but no prosecution followed. Incredibly, Amy and another child remained living in the Burke family home where Amy remained until she made a disclosure in 2011. For four years after the risk to this young girl was uncovered, she and other children were left in a setting in which the authorities knew they were at severe risk of rape and abuse. This risk, and the failure of State agencies to act, are best emphasised by the fact that a third victim was uncovered as a result of the investigation following Amy's disclosure. These were young girls who were already vulnerable - that is the precise reason they were in foster care - yet the State failed them when they most needed it. This represents another collapse in the systems and processes designed, we had all hoped, to protect and guard vulnerable children. It was not so long ago that the House discussed the harrowing case of Grace. It is an indictment of our system, therefore, that we come here again and again to express rightful outrage while knowing that it is only a matter of time before the next case arises. I am sure the Taoiseach agrees we cannot go on like this. There needs to be accountability. The Government must support the call for an independent inquiry into this case. Will it do so?I join the Taoiseach in commending the women who have come through the awful ordeal that was visited on them as very small girls. I commend them on their bravery. I accept that the protection of our children is now a matter which looms large in public policy in a way that it did not ten or 15 years ago. However, there is no room for complacency. I recall very accurately that as we dealt with the Grace case, we discovered that there were still massive gaps and inadequacies in our child protection system, as well as a reluctance within parts of the HSE and other services to be held accountable when mistakes are made or systems failures identified.I ask the Taoiseach to tell us more about the independent investigation that he says commenced in 2016. That is, of course, prior to an apology being made to the victims in question. Is this the independent investigation for which the legal representatives of the victims have called? Have the victims and their legal representatives had access to the terms of reference of the inquiry and will they have an opportunity to provide testimony to it? If the Taoiseach could answer those questions in as precise terms as possible, I would appreciate it."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-04-25	---	2	Increasingly, parents across the State, including the Taoiseach's constituency of Dublin West, contact me on the lack of places for children with autism spectrum disorder, ASD, in ASD units or mainstream classrooms. That experience is common among members of the Sinn Féin group. We have lost count of the number of parents who have contacted our representatives in desperation because they have nowhere to send their child. Waiting lists are long. In some cases, people must travel long distances to access units but in many cases there are no units to access. I am aware of schools that are hesitant about opening an ASD unit, sometimes due to questions of adequate funding. Parents are at their wits' end.A review of the system with a joined-up approach by the Departments of Health and Education and Skills is required to ensure that services are in place to support children and their families. In the case of Dublin West, the Taoiseach's bailiwick, there is increasing demand and a campaign among this substantial cohort of parents for what they call a special school. They are under immense pressure and we need to give them an answer. I raise this issue in respect of the Education (Admissions to Schools) Bill 2016, the point being that these children will not have admission to any school or unit because the facilities are not there, the funding is not there or blocks are being put in their way. We need to sort this out.Where are the children supposed to go?They are being offered home tuition.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-04-24	---	1	"There are serious issues with the sentences handed down for sexual crimes perpetrated against women, children and men in the State. This evening, RTÉ's ""Prime Time"" will air a programme which underscores this truth. The programme centres on the rape of three young girls at a foster home in County Galway between 2003 and 2007. The girls were all under the age of ten when they were subjected to the vilest assaults at the hands of Keith Burke, who lived in their foster home. There are serious questions as to how the HSE handled the initial reports of abuse and how children were left to live with Mr. Burke after these reports were made. I have no doubt but that more details of the handling by the State and the HSE of these cases will emerge.What we know is the gravity of the crimes committed by Keith Burke against these young girls. We also know the leniency of the punishment handed down by the courts. From an initial 70 charges reduced to 39 sample counts, Mr. Burke was found guilty on 23 counts. At a sentencing hearing two weeks ago for the rape and brutalisation of these children, he received seven and a half years' imprisonment with one year suspended. Nobody with an ounce of common sense or compassion would argue that this sentence was in any way proportionate or that it represented justice. We could try but I doubt we could imagine the burning anger and heartbreak of Keith Burke's victims at this sentence.The leniency of sentences for sexual crimes fundamentally undermines public confidence in the administration of justice. This is a most serious matter. How we address this deficiency in our criminal justice system is a big challenge for us, as legislators. I have asked the Taoiseach on several occasions to consider the introduction of sentencing guidelines which would be drafted by a sentencing committee. Making such a proposal does not encroach on the separation of powers or the autonomy of the Bench. It would ensure, however, that prison sentences are proportionate to the crimes committed.Our justice spokesperson, Deputy Ó Laoghaire, has tabled amendments to the judicial appointments Bill in line with these proposals. We wish to be constructive on this matter. We want to work with the Government to resolve these issues. The Government must take into account how badly these young women, and many others, have been failed by our justice system. I am of the view that our amendments are critical to achieving the best possible outcome in the interests of the public at large and, in particular, for the victims of rape and sexual abuse. Will the Taoiseach give a commitment that the Government will support our amendments?In no way am I seeking to second-guess anybody. I have stated clearly the necessity of the separation of powers and the autonomy of the Bench. Neither do I believe, however, that we should second-guess the testimony of people who have come through the judicial system and the consistent message that they feel let down and that they have been failed. One of the victims in the case I set out to the Taoiseach said, ""I was very angry. I thought I was fine but six-and-a-half years, seven-and-a-half years with one suspended, that is nothing [for] what he put us through."" That is a brave and truthful testimony from this woman. We have entered an amendment to the Judicial Council Bill. I must correct myself because I misspoke earlier. I meant to refer to the Judicial Council Bill. The legislation, as currently drafted, allows for the circulation of information. We need more than that; we need a capacity to formulate sentencing guidelines. We do not need mandatory sentencing but, rather, guidelines which will give parameters to the Judiciary. Crucially, such guidelines will also address a real crisis in public confidence in terms of how the State, the system and the Judiciary regard these crimes and punish, or fail to sufficiently punish, them. Will the Taoiseach support our amendments?Is the Taoiseach accepting our amendments then?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-04-18	---	1	This is a very troubling story which, undoubtedly, raises questions for the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment, Deputy Denis Naughten, about his discussion with a person acting on behalf of INM in connection with the attempt to take over Celtic Media. This all happened in November 2016. The Minister gave advance notice to the PR executive, acting on behalf of Independent News & Media, of his plan to refer the takeover to the Broadcasting Authority of Ireland.We understand that the Minister, when speaking to this individual, understood he was working on behalf of INM. The engagement between them and the Minister's decision to refer the proposed acquisition to the Broadcasting Authority of Ireland was then a subject of an email sent by the PR company to the chairperson of INM, and this email was subsequently forwarded to Mr. Denis O'Brien. This email stressed that the information contained within it should be treated with the strictest of confidence, which is at variance with the Taoiseach's assertion that all this had full public purview and that it was not confidential at all.We also understand that the PR company in question did not log the engagement with the Minister with the lobbying registrar, as it should have done. As the Taoiseach knows, this is a legal requirement under the Regulation of Lobbying Act 2015. This law is designed to protect the public interest and ensure transparency in the lobbying process. The Office of the Director of Corporate Enforcement, of which we spoke yesterday, has expressed concerns about the sharing of insider information and, perhaps, breaches of stock market rules. All this gets very murky in its totality.There are very serious issues over the concentration and consolidation of media ownership and, by extension, power in this State. We are all conversant with that. I am sure I do not have to remind the Taoiseach that, in the past, interactions between a former Minister and a powerful interest in the media and a proposed acquisition spawned the Moriarty tribunal. Indeed, that tribunal is one of the reasons people distrust powerful politicians and the political process itself.Let me put a couple of questions to the Taoiseach - ones he has failed to answer so far. He said the Minister contacted him last night to tell him the story would appear in the paper. Am I to take it from that that this was the first time he had knowledge of the conversation between the Minister and the person acting on behalf of INM? The Taoiseach says he has not had sight of the affidavit. He does not need sight of the court affidavit to put to the Minister, Deputy Naughten, the very obvious questions that ought to be put to him.Does that make it okay?I am asking legitimate questions. I would prefer to be in here raising a different issue but we are not. For all the guff about new politics, is this where we are at, with the gold-plated few having access to Ministers and, in part, given the heads-up on decisions the Minister has taken? What way is that to conduct politics? I very much hope the Minister will present himself this evening. I hope he has full, transparent and credible answers in respect of all this.The story states very clearly that the meeting took place in November 2016. The Taoiseach seems to be contesting that fact.I am saying, if I am correct, that the meeting in 2016 occurred on 12 November.The Minister is on record as suggesting, in answer to a question in the House, that he had not taken a decision at that stage. All this is extremely troubling and worrying.I do not accept the position of the Taoiseach, as Head of Government, that this is simply a matter for the courts.It is true that it is a matter for the courts on points of law but the conduct of one of his Ministers is a matter for him and the entire Dáil.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-04-18	---	2	Will the Taoiseach clarify when business will be reordered to allow for statements and questions to the Minister? I understand from media reports that he has finally agreed to implement the Ombudsman's recommendations following a scathing report late last year on the Department's administration of the Magdalen laundry redress scheme. The report came on foot of complaints made by 27 women who had been excluded by the Department from the scheme. Even after the investigation was complete, the first instinct of the Department of Justice and Equality was to push back. In evidence to the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality in January the Ombudsman stated that in his ten years as Ombudsman, he had never reached a point where a Department had, prior to publication of a report, absolutely and categorically refused to engage in the process of accepting and implementing the recommendations made. That reflection very much echoes the experiences of the excluded women.A small number of women are awaiting redress. They lack capacity and are particularly reliant on the Department and the Courts Service to support their applications. The Taoiseach's decision to implement the report's recommendations is welcome. The Minister for Justice and Equality-----Pardon?I am not making any lengthy statement.He was doing a comedy routine with his counterpart. May I pose my question?Thank you so much. I ask the Taoiseach for a timeframe within which the recommendations will be delivered on. I thank the Ceann Comhairle. I will now resume my seat. I thank him for his courtesy.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-04-18	---	3	"Ar mo shon féin agus ar son Shinn Féin, ba mhaith liom comhbhrón a dhéanamh le clann agus le cairde an iar-Theachta Peter Mathews, a fuair bás an bhliain seo caite. On my own behalf and on behalf of Sinn Féin, I want to extend our heartfelt sympathies to the family and friends of Peter Mathews, who sadly passed away in February 2017. As has already been alluded to, Peter had a relatively short but eventful and colourful political career. Of course it all started on ""Tonight with Vincent Browne"". It is unquestionably the case that Vincent Browne met his match in Peter Mathews, and perhaps .Peter Mathews had a colourful career in national politics. He served the people of the Dublin South constituency with honour and commitment. As we know, before Peter was elected to this House he had a long and distinguished career in business and finance. While there were many things that Peter and I would debate and disagree on, we also shared an enormous amount of common ground. He was not just a very learned and intellectually gifted man; he remained a very curious person and was always open to having a debate. Sometimes, a Cheann Comhairle, he was willing to have the debate at length.Peter was always in good humour. I always enjoyed speaking to him. Above all, he was a very kind person. He would be the first to extend condolences, solidarity or good wishes to colleagues as the circumstances dictated. I was the recipient of such kindness from him. He regularly quoted Susan, who was like the oracle advising him from afar. He was not slow to tell us that she sometimes chastised him as well.The last time I met Peter was the Christmas just before he died. He bore his illness with considerable dignity. Although he was unwell, he remained defiant, determined and unrepentant in his strongly held views on the need for reform in Irish politics and the need for people outside the sometimes claustrophobic political circle to have a say and an influence. It is with great sadness at the passing of Peter Mathews that I join everybody here in extending our sympathies and condolences to his family. For his wife, Susan; his sons, James, John and David; and his daughter, Maria, he was a person of whom they are quite rightly very proud. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam dílis."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-04-17	---	1	The news of the data breach at INM is deeply alarming. Hundreds of thousands of emails may have been compromised. Nineteen individuals were singled out for data interrogation in October 2014 and, allegedly, it involved a hired firm conducting a trawl of electronic records of journalists and others at the company. They included investigative journalists and lawyers who had worked on the Moriarty tribunal. This data interrogation represents an attack on the privacy and safety of journalists and their sources. It undermines fundamentals of how members of the press go about their work in the public interest. We know also that a former chairperson of INM ordered the data interrogation, but we do not know his reasons for so doing. We do not know why the 19 individuals I cited were specifically targeted and certainly do not know why the bill for the data interrogation was paid by Blaydon Limited, a company based on the Isle of Man.The ODCE, as the Taoiseach said, wants the courts to appoint inspectors to go into INM to conduct a full and proper investigation, which is correct and understandable. However, yesterday it emerged that Mr. Denis O'Brien was seeking a judicial review of the ODCE's request to appoint such inspectors by accusing it of leaking information on the data breach. The ODCE has been investigating the story for a whole year without any leak, but as soon as the affidavit arrived at INM premises there were numerous leaks. INM even reported on details of the affidavit. It appears that an attempt is being made to silence the ODCE.There is no doubt that the office is up against it because of a lack of resources and support on the Taoiseach's watch and that of previous Governments. Currently, 35 staff and seven gardaí are assigned to the office. That gives a clear insight into the State's attitude to white collar crime and corporate enforcement. Companies should fear the ODCE and the consequences of data breaches or any other unethical action. The office should be properly resourced and empowered to ensure white-collar crime is not only prosecuted but deterred. This jurisdiction has gained a reputation as being the Wild West when it comes to tax avoidance and the prevalence of white collar crime. If we are to shake this reputation, we need to take a stand here and now. The Taoiseach cannot stand by and allow the ODCE to be disrupted or silenced. He has a responsibility to support its work. Does the office have his full support? How does he plan to demonstrate that support in terms of the provision of adequate resources and staffing?The view of many people is that powerful politicians in and out of government in the State have stood off and even courted very powerful interests within the media. I think the Taoiseach will agree with me that that is a very dangerous perception, never mind the reality of it. I agree with him that the ODCE needs to be assisted in doing its work and I challenge the Taoiseach to put his money where his mouth is. I will grant that he did better than Deputy Micheál Martin when, in 2005, 2006 and 2007, as the line Minister, he, in a studious way, ignored the calls for an increase in the number of staff for the office. The Taoiseach now tells us that there are 36 staff and the Garda complement. Contrast that with 350 welfare inspectors. Of course, we need welfare inspectors. When one looks at those figures, it tells a tale of where the balance of consideration is. In 2018, the Taoiseach allocated a budget of €5 million to the Office of the Director of Corporate Enforcement. He also allocated €5 million to his unit for spin.That, too, tells where the Taoiseach's balance of consideration and emphasis lies. I will put the question to the Taoiseach again. There is a request for four additional staff places. He has indicated difficulties in recruitment.I want to hear solidly from the Taoiseach his concrete proposals to beef up the resourcing and staff complement of that office.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-03-28	---	1	"There was a harrowing, heartbreaking letter from a victim of rape carried in  on Monday. I do not know if the Taoiseach has read it. This person was a victim of marital rape and the letter was shocking. The author wrote bravely and with considerable dignity. Her words reflected the trauma of being sexually assaulted and the additional horror inflicted when the perpetrator is one's intimate partner. She describes being terrified for hours the night she was attacked. She wrote:I was threatened with a knife, I was threatened with being raped a second time until I promised to stay in the relationship. For the remainder of the night I was threatened with being killed unless I promised that I would stay.Her child witnessed this.The crime was punished and the perpetrator was sentenced. However, the woman expresses her deep anger and distress at the news in February that the sentence of the perpetrator of her rape was to be reduced by two years. She explained that ""Every day of those ... years counted for us"", and how the reduction in the initial sentence has robbed her, as she puts it, of her ""peace of mind and freedom"". The victim believes that the judges did not take seriously enough the gravity of the offence against her, that is, the offence of marital rape. She feels abandoned and let down by the judicial system.I have raised the issues of inconsistency, leniency and light sentences, particularly those related to sexual crime, in this House previously.The case is concluded.I have not criticised the judgment. I have reflected the real, lived experience of a woman, as published in a newspaper. If the Ceann Comhairle would do me the courtesy of allowing me to get to the substance of my question-----Implicit and explicit in what I am saying is the true, accurate, real-life reflection of the reality as experienced by this woman and many others.There are significant issues relating to inconsistencies, leniency and light sentencing, particularly when it comes to sexual crime. I believe this underlines the need for sentencing guidelines. I understand that the Judicial Council Bill 2017 contains provision for a sentencing information committee. However, it does not recommend the drafting of guidelines, and as such I believe it will prove far too weak and will therefore not have the desired effect. This sends a dangerous message to victims generally and to society at large, because the case I have described is by no means unique. It is by no means isolated. There are many others. I have previously urged the Government to face up to that fact and to take the appropriate action.I have commended the adoption of the sentencing council model as the way forward. I have outlined its merits in terms of consistency, accountability and the appropriate involvement of stakeholders. I want to know if the Government will now adopt that approach and adopt guidelines for sentencing."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-03-28	---	2	I am not presuming for a second to second-guess any member of the Judiciary. This case went through the courts. The accused was found guilty. The sentence was handed down and the matter was then appealed. That all happened. Furthermore, I am not referring to mandatory sentences. I have raised this issue many times and I am simply highlighting again the fact that there is now a deep disquiet in large sections of society in terms of consistency and leniency of sentences handed down. This woman was not second-guessing anything either. She lived through this horror, not just as a witness to it but as the victim of it. She has now set out her experience in the clearest of terms and it is not unique.The Judicial Council Bill 2017 does not, as it currently stands, allow for sentencing guidelines.However, my colleague Deputy Donnchadh Ó Laoghaire has moved amendments that would allow that to happen. I want a commitment from the Taoiseach that those amendments will be not just considered, but adopted. We have debated this with the Taoiseach many times and this is the only way in which we can build the kind of confidence and trust that the Judiciary deserves in respect of serious crime and the sentences handed down.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-03-28	---	3	"The Government has just published the scheme of the Bill which will be introduced if the referendum to remove the eighth amendment succeeds. I welcome that and I trust it will provide the necessary clarity on many of the legislative issues involved. Whatever about the level of confusion sown yesterday, there should be no confusion as to the necessity to repeal the eighth amendment. Issues relating to women's health do not belong in our Constitution. There is nothing unclear about that in my mind. I trust that the proposed legislation is humane, compassionate and respects women's health and choices. I appeal to people to consider the matter on that basis. The campaign is now on and we will campaign vigorously for a ""Yes"" vote. I hope others who similarly take a ""Yes"" position will do likewise, including the Taoiseach.When will the referendum date be officially announced? I understand 25 May is generally considered to be the date on which the referendum will be held. Is it possible to confirm that for us today?"
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-03-28	---	4	The Deputy is.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-03-27	---	1	Yes.Ar mo shon féin agus ar son Shinn Féin, ba mhaith liom comhbhrón a dhéanamh le clann agus cairde an iar-Cheann Comhairle, Seán Ó Treasaigh, a fuair bás ag an deireadh seachtaine. On my own behalf and on behalf of Sinn Féin, I extend sincere and heartfelt sympathies to the family, friends and, indeed, Labour Party colleagues of the former Ceann Comhairle, Seán Treacy, who passed away at the weekend.Bhí gairm fhada aige in oifig poiblí agus táim cinnte go bhfuil a mhuintir bródúil as sin. I have no doubt that his family are extremely proud of his long and distinguished career as a public representative. He spent almost four decades in political life, serving as a Deputy for Tipperary South, a Member of the European Parliament and as Ceann Comhairle. He was widely recognised for his unflagging commitment to the people of his constituency. His passing will be felt by so many, particularly those in Tipperary, to whom he gave immense service for so many years.I join others in extending sympathy and condolences to Seán's family, in particular, and former colleagues and friends at this sad time. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam dílis.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-03-27	---	2	In the past hour, we heard of the Government's decision to expel a Russian diplomat because of the nerve agent attack in England. I absolutely agree with the Tánaiste's statement that the use of chemical weapons in any circumstances is wholly unacceptable. He is correct in that. I also fully understand the need to protect what is called national security, which is also correct. The expulsion from Ireland of Russian diplomats acting as intelligence officers is a more than suitable action to be pursued if indeed they are behind the attack in England on Sergei and Yulia Skripal. Regardless of this particular attack, diplomats of any country acting as spies should be expelled from any state or jurisdiction. However, we do need to see the evidence underpinning this decision. It is not sufficient to simply cite solidarity with Britain. Such a significant and dramatic Irish foreign policy decision should be dictated by Irish security analysis. In this case, it seems as though a decision has been based on information from a foreign security intelligence service, which is unprecedented. Essentially, the Taoiseach is asking us to trust Boris Johnson, which, dare I say, might not be the wisest course of action.The move shows a disregard for Irish military neutrality and is completely in line with the efforts of Fine Gael and the Government to undermine and dismantle that neutrality. The Government has pushed for a more militarised EU through its support for permanent structured co-operation, PESCO, which would see Ireland participate in EU military operations and funding EU military research that is intended to complement NATO missions and strategic goals. As recently as the beginning of this month, Fine Gael's four MEPs published a document which seeks to tear up Ireland's military neutrality. The document proposes to give the Government the power to deploy Irish troops as part of military missions that do not have UN approval and this would eventually see Irish resources deployed at the behest of NATO.The principles of neutrality and independence have always been at the centre of Irish foreign policy and Irish people overwhelmingly support the continuation of this policy. It is the Taoiseach's job to defend and reinforce that neutrality.We cannot allow Government decisions to be based on assessments by British intelligence which - let us face it - does not have a good track record when it comes to Ireland. Does the Taoiseach intend meeting with the representatives of political parties in the Dáil to offer a full and frank explanation as to what has led to this dramatic shift in policy?I suggest to the Taoiseach that it is not sufficient that he selectively brief his colleagues in Fianna Fáil on such a major development. This story, the abhorrence of anybody using chemical weapons in any circumstances, and not least the attack itself have caused unease and disquiet. I do not think that anybody would argue but that the State and Government have to take action where there is a  case and where there is absolute concrete evidence of any such action and that a diplomat or diplomats must be expelled or an embassy punished in such circumstances. The story in the public ether however is that this is a matter of solidarity with the UK and that alone. I asked the Taoiseach if he would brief the leaders of the parties in this House. I take from his response that he will, but I put it to the Taoiseach - he should acknowledge this - that his position on military neutrality and an independent Irish foreign policy is threadbare. The recent actions of his four MEPs have served to reinforce the fact that he does not care a whit for that policy. The Taoiseach might tell us who on the Fianna Fáil benches was briefed and explain why it is that Fianna Fáil enjoys such selective treatment.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-03-21	---	1	Foilsíodh an tuairisc reathúil is déanaí den Bhord um Thionóntachtaí Cónaithe ar maidin. Cuirfeadh sé gruaim ar dhuine é a léamh, a Thaoisigh. Sa cheathrú cuid de 2017, bhí ardú 7.4% ar theach a fháil ar cíos.Tá an cíos ar an mheán €1,054 ar fud an Stát. Tá an cíos ar an mheán €1,511 i mBaile Átha Cliath. I mórcheantar Bhaile Átha Cliath tá costas cíosa níos mó ná €1,100. Tharla sé seo fad agus a bhí do Rialtas i gcumhacht a Thaoisigh. In ainneoin do ráiteas rialta go raibh tú ag déileáil leis an bhfadhb. Tá gnáthdaoine i mBaile Átha Cliath, i gCorcaigh agus ar fud na tíre ag íoc suas le leath dá bpá ar chíos. Tá siad ag maireachtáil ar éigean. Seo iad daoine a éiríonn go moc ar maidin a Thaoisigh. Oibríonn said go crua. Ba mhian leo airgead a sholáthar dá gclanna. Tá éispéis acu. Ba mhaith leo plean a dhéanamh don todhchaí ach ní féidir leo. Tá sé scannalach ach ní ábhar iontais é de bharr thaifead do Rialtas ar chúrsaí tithíóchta.This morning's quarterly report from the Residential Tenancies Board makes for very grim reading. Average rent levels in Dublin, the greater Dublin area and across the State are utterly scandalous. Yesterday I raised with the Tánaiste the issue of the working poor or the just-getting-by class, as I described them. I set out for him in the clearest way the manner in which these workers and families were struggling and today these scandalous rent figures have been published. They reflect the fact that the Government's stated ambition to achieve rent certainty or affordability is clearly failing. Its policy is failing. That average rent across the State is €1,054 is a cause of shame and disgrace. It is unaffordable for working families, people at work who get up very early in the morning, work very hard and have the modest aspiration of having a secure roof over their heads. What is the Government going to do? The situation is clearly not sustainable. When will the Government introduce real rent certainty?Tá sé seo ar fad cloiste againn cheana féin. The Taoiseach has sung that song previously. It is very alarming that he is simply satisfied that the runaway levels of rent inflation have started to abate. It seems, in the Taoiseach's mind at least, that the mission has been accomplished. In Dublin average rent stands at €1,511. As it happens, I heard the interview to which the Taoiseach referred and the woman in question was very well informed, but let me tell him who is even better informed. The best informed people on this issue are the families and workers who are expected to find over €1,500 simply to cover their rent. By the way, they are many of the same people who are in insecure work, on low pay and up early and hard at it and simply cannot make it.All they get from the Government is a recitation of statistics and a deaf ear. That is not good enough. The Taoiseach should recognise that the Government's policy is failing, unless he believes it is acceptable for the average Dubliner to have to find in excess of €1,500 just to cover the rent. If that is his view, it is not one I share with him. I again put it to him that we need real rent certainty and affordability in Dublin and across the State.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-03-20	---	1	Social Justice Ireland has today published a report which focuses on the number of people in the State living in poverty. It makes for startling reading and should serve as a serious wake-up call for the Government. The research shows that 780,000 people are living below the poverty line, but the figure that really jumps out from the report is that more than 100,000 of the 780,000 people have jobs but cannot earn a living wage. The reality is that this group which is perhaps best described as the barely-getting-by class has continued to grow since 2009. They are people who get out of bed early in the morning and work hard as they want to provide for their families. They have modest aspirations to have a decent life, yet they cannot plan for the future. How can they when they cannot make ends meet in the here and now? The casualisation of work, insecure employment and zero-hour contracts are a real problem. Low pay, especially when taken in the context of the soaring cost of living, is also a real problem. Workers on very low wages and in insecure employment are somehow being asked to find the money to pay extortionate rent, grossly inflated insurance premiums and crushing child care costs.Each bill that comes through their letter box lands with the weight of a sledgehammer. Many of these workers live with a constant sense of vulnerability. They fear that one unexpected occurrence, such as the car breaking down or a family member falling sick, will throw the train off the tracks and into chaos.I know Fine Gael's mantra is that a job is the surest way to guard against poverty; certainly, it should be. However, Fine Gael says this while turning a blind eye to a recovery in which work does not pay. A job cannot be cheap labour. It must mean the cost of living and more. A job must give any worker the means not only to survive but also to thrive. Good and secure jobs would replace workers' vulnerability with confidence and certainty. The Government has a responsibility to ensure that these principles underpin our economy. The aspiration to a good life cannot be the preserve of the wealthy or the higher echelons of society. To these more than 100,000 workers, the Taoiseach's and the Government's republic of opportunity is, quite frankly, a joke, and a bad one.Has the Tánaiste read the report from Social Justice Ireland? It makes a number of recommendations, including making tax credits refundable and the introduction of a living wage. Will the Government do those two things?I thank the Tánaiste and urge him to read the report. Strong as the economic data might be, this report reflects the fact we are not sharing prosperity. In fact, for 100,000 people at work, the prosperity train has not checked in at all. They still struggle, as I set out, not for ostentatious things, luxuries or extras but for the basics - a new pair of shoes for their child, a warm winter coat and the ability to make their rent, mortgage or household bills without constantly worrying.I know new jobs have been created and welcome the fact that there is more work in the economy. I want to see people having the dignity and opportunity that work should afford. However, that can only happen when work is secure and when it is remunerated at an appropriate level. To applaud the minimum wage as though that were reaching some high-water level in the economy is not on.We all know that what is needed is a living wage that allows workers and their families to live decently and without a constant sense of worry. I put it to the Tánaiste again that it is a living wage that his Government must introduce.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	debate	2018-03-09	---	1	"Gabhaim buíochas leis an gCeann Comhairle agus leis an Aire. Tá sé thar am athghairm a dhéanamh ar an ochtú leasú. Tá sé in am dúinn muinín a bheith againn i mná na hÉireann. Tá sé in am dúinn san Oireachtas seo ár bpoist agus ár n-obair a dhéanamh.I warmly welcome the publication of this Bill. It is only appropriate at the outset to acknowledge and commend the work of our Oireachtas colleagues on the all-party committee, under the stewardship of Senator Catherine Noone. I acknowledge my party colleagues, Deputies Louise O'Reilly and Jonathan O'Brien and Senator Paul Gavan, for their tremendous efforts.The repeal of the eighth amendment is an absolute necessity to ensure that women have access to proper and appropriate health care. The truth is that the eighth amendment should never have been placed in our Constitution in the first place. It was a mistake and bitter experience over decades has amply demonstrated this. It is time to own up to that mistake and to correct it. It was - let it be said - born out of an entirely sexist view of the world and the conservative social values that dominated our society for decades. The power and influence of the church and its strict reactionary doctrine were central to that system. It was the dogma that produced the now infamous Magdalen laundries and mother and baby homes, when women were incarcerated against their will behind high walls and wrought iron gates for the supposed offence of becoming pregnant outside of wedlock, forced into slave labour under the shadow of the cross. Their children were taken away from them, they were told they were a source of shame, that they were sinners and were not fit to live amongst the general population. This was the cost of a social system in which the primary function of woman was to bear children and to do so at any cost.The insertion of the eighth amendment into our Constitution in 1983 was an extension of that system. That Ireland is gone and good riddance, and the eighth amendment, too, must go. It is essential to recall the real cost of the eighth amendment to real women and girls. In the 1992 X case, a suicidal girl of 14, the child victim of rape, was prevented by the High Court from travelling abroad to obtain an abortion. The eighth amendment has caused countless women and families with the trauma of a diagnosis of fatal foetal abnormality to be forced to make a harrowing journey abroad. It has created an alphabet roll call of women's misery, women who in many cases sought and could only find relief in international courts and tribunals to recognise their suffering and the cruelty of our State. It cost the life of Savita Halappanavar, a 31 year old who, while miscarrying, was denied the abortion that would have saved her life. In 2015, a pregnant woman was kept on life support for 24 long days after she was declared medically brain dead, because a foetal heartbeat was detected in her womb. When her family asked that life support be removed, their request was denied because of the eighth amendment. This was in spite of the fact that the foetus had no chance of survival. It took an appeal by the woman's family to the High Court for her life support to be switched off. Even in death, the eighth amendment could rob a woman of her dignity.Some people will say that these are the hard cases, the outliers and exceptions. They will argue that hard cases make bad law. I say that these cases are the hardest, most cruel face of the eighth amendment. I say that our bad law made these hard cases. I say that these women and these cases are, in the very first instance, the reason to repeal the eighth amendment. We as a society must demand and ensure that there are no more hard cases, no more Savitas, no more traumatised women known to us in the public domain as letters of the alphabet. That is our first duty. We must assert clearly that the State will not force a rape victim to carry a pregnancy to term. We must demand that women and families faced with the devastating diagnosis of fatal foetal abnormality are no longer denied care, comfort and choice here in their home country. We must assert that doctors must be free to do their job and must be able to make medical decisions in the interests of women without a threat of criminal sanction. We must ensure that health care choices - life and death choices - are not skewed or delayed while medics seek advice from constitutional lawyers. We must be in no doubt that the eighth amendment has had that chilling effect.I thank the Minister, Deputy Simon Harris, for his words this morning. It is essential that he has emphasised the fact that the courts still feature. Access to and the review of the courts are still applicable to any legislation that might come through this House. I say to those who would scaremonger on this count, ""Shame on you."" Anyone who argues that the courts have been written out of the scenario, that this is some kind of for untrustworthy politicians, is willfully misleading public opinion.Legislation that comes through this House is subject to review of the courts, full stop. May that message go out as clearly as the Minister has articulated it this morning.On the legislation that might follow, there is no doubt that in the course of the public debate, attention will correctly turn to what might or might not find legislative expression. That should not obscure the experiences of the eighth amendment. Let that not happen. The Minister has indicated in a sensible manner that he might be fully faithful, or largely faithful, to the findings of the all-party Oireachtas committee. That to me makes sense. The committee's deliberations were a collaborative exercise and the recommendations are clear. I note the proposition of 12 weeks to which the Minister and Deputy Kelleher referred. I acknowledge that it found expression initially as the solution to victims of rape and how they might be afforded the service they need in a compassionate, thoughtful and real way. I also note that it is based on the absolute reality of abortion pills, which women and girls are taking with no medical supervision, and on the utter certainty of the medical jeopardy this presents.I wish to acknowledge that the 12-week proposition is challenging for some people because it represents a marked departure in practice. I am thankful that we will have time for people to debate that proposition in a calm and informed way, should it come before the House. It is a proposition that Sinn Féin is considering and I will bring it to an Ard-Fheis of my party in advance of the legislation coming before this House.I despise the term ""abortion on demand"". I wish that people would stop using it. It is deeply offensive to women and mothers. Women do not demand abortions or go to a clinic and flippantly, after an indiscretion, make a decision to have an abortion. I appeal that the public debate does not become so debased and disrespectful to women and girls that this type of rhetoric is thrown around.The issue of trust has been raised. Frankly, I would understand a mistrust in the political system and establishment on this issue, not because the system has acted hastily but because it has sat on its hands and delayed for decades. We are not asking for an inordinate or inappropriate level of trust in us, although we are public representatives. We are asking people to trust themselves, to trust the evidence and to understand decades of real, lived experience. On ""Morning Ireland"" this morning I heard someone speaking from what was termed a pro-life position and discussing public opinion. That person noted - I believe honestly - that public opinion is in a process around the proposition from Government. However, there is no support in public opinion for traumatising rape victims and coercing them to carry a pregnancy to term. There is no support in public opinion to make exiles of traumatised and vulnerable women and couples and families with a diagnosis of fatal foetal abnormality. I believe that Irish public opinion no longer tolerates the view that women cannot get dignity and recognition or exercise their rights in Ireland, and that if they want them they should go to the European courts or the United Nations. I believe Irish public opinion has had its fill of that, and in time, when the proposition is put in an atmosphere of respect, calm and tolerance, that the right decision will be made, the historic wrong will be corrected and the eighth amendment will be repealed."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-03-07	---	1	The Supreme Court has spoken and its decision is unanimous. Its judgment clears the way to advance the referendum on the repeal of the eighth amendment to the Constitution. I understand the Taoiseach had a correct concern for legal clarity before advancing the legislation and that, correctly, he did not wish to pre-empt or even create an impression of interfering or seeking to interfere with the decisions of the courts. Now, however, matters have been clarified and there is no reason or basis for further delay.As the Taoiseach knows, the eighth amendment represents a real and ongoing threat to the health and lives of Irish women. Our recent history is marked with so many tragic episodes of that hard reality. The eighth amendment has cast a shadow on medical practice. It places the threat of criminal sanction against doctors for making medical decisions in the best interest of their patients. It has to go. The eighth amendment is a relic of an Ireland of the past, yet it restricts the rights of women in the here and now and profoundly affects our welfare. It should not have been introduced into the Constitution in the first place.The first piece of the puzzle facing us is the publication of the referendum Bill. Now that we have legal clarity and given the unanimity of the Supreme Court decision, I put it to the Taoiseach that the Cabinet needs to meet the Attorney General on this matter today and the legislation for the referendum ought to be published today. When the Business Committee meets today, it should schedule a debate immediately, starting tomorrow. We should have a full day's sitting on Friday to advance this legislation because time is not on our side.We all appreciate that we need to create a better Ireland for our sisters, daughters and women. This is an opportunity to ensure that we never again allow women to be faced with the injustice and degradation that generations have gone through. Of course, the referendum is about the whole of Irish society coming together and saying women are entitled to their fundamental right to health care. We have an historic responsibility to establish this right. Respect and compassion for women must prevail. It is time to trust women. It is time to allow doctors to do their job, and it is time for us, as legislators, to do ours.We have an important responsibility to pass the legislation on the referendum in a timely fashion. Will the Cabinet meet today to discuss the judgment and receive the advice of the Attorney General? Can the referendum Bill be published today? Can we commence the debate tomorrow and have a full day's sitting on Friday?Like every Member of the Dáil, I am sure, I share the Taoiseach's wish that the debate be measured, informed, respectful and enlightening. That is our wish. For our part, we will do everything to set that tone. I appreciate the Taoiseach's comments in that regard. I appreciate that the Taoiseach does not want to make unforced errors or to rush but I have to put it to him that this subject has been marked in our political history not by urgency or rushing but by delay, prevarication and a lack of willingness to act decisively. We need to turn that corner too. I appreciate that the Attorney General has to do his job in a methodical and thoughtful fashion. I ask the Taoiseach again, however, to consider the timetabling with a sense of purpose and urgency. If the legislation can be published sooner than tomorrow, it should happen. Certainly, the debate ought to commence on Thursday. We need a full day's sitting on Friday.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-03-07	---	2	As we speak, there are approximately 20,000 households without water, 50,000 with a reduced flow of water and more than 1 million in Dublin with a restricted supply. The programme for Government contains a commitment to protect plans set out by Irish water to upgrade our water infrastructure. The events of recent days highlight the fact that the capital investment plan, published by the previous Government of which the Taoiseach was a member, is not sufficient to address the challenges posed. Domestic water charges have been overwhelmingly rejected. Lest the Taoiseach feels tempted to make the link between that matter and the difficulties in the here and now, he should bear in mind that Irish Water has exactly the same amount of capital funding as it would have done had domestic water charges gone ahead. Is he prepared to make a commitment for additional capital funding for 2019 to start getting to grips with this?I agree.People do pay, just as they pay the Minister's wages.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-03-06	---	1	"I believe that the Taoiseach doth protest too much on this matter. I am not entirely clear what is his assertion of his own personal conspiracy theory. I am not entirely impressed with the Taoiseach's political priorities. In budget 2018 the strategic communications unit was allocated €5 million. I will put this in context. This is one third of the additional money that was promised for mental health - so much for the Taoiseach's political priorities. This communications unit is now mired in scandal. The Taoiseach can rant and rave, he can point the finger and he can talk about conspiracy theories but that is now where it is at.He said in October that there would be no political advertising or promotion of political parties and that the Civil Service and public sector code would continue to apply in respect of this unit, and this has clearly not been the case. That was a piece of spin in and of itself. The Taoiseach's spin unit has followed a strategy to promote Fine Gael in newspapers in a very underhand and unprincipled way by directing editors to present paid-for political advertising as regular news articles. He referred to the email courtesy of Ellen Coyne, who is not on these benches but on the media bench above. The email stated: ""Part of our deal is that we don't have any moniker such as ""Advertorial"" or ""special feature"" or anything like that - it simply runs as normal editorial."" The Taoiseach is right - this referred to the Creative Ireland campaign. However, the Taoiseach also knows that this was very explicitly the template to be used for all other adverts and that this strategy was explicitly articulated. In this email, the words I have just put on the record were followed by the words, ""I do hope your editorial team understands this"". I am very sure editorial teams fully understood it. This strategy is underhand and clearly designed for party-political promotion. It was carried out using not just public money, but the resources of the Civil Service. As the Taoiseach knows, the Civil Service is prohibited from being used to advance the party-political objectives of whomsoever is in government. This unit was not about informing citizens----------but about promoting the Taoiseach's party. It was not about news, but about propaganda. It was not done to benefit the people, but to benefit Fine Gael. The Taoiseach now says he has ordered a review of the unit----------and has asked Martin Fraser, a person for whom I have the utmost regard, to carry out that review. However, the Taoiseach can hardly ask any of us to treat this as a credible proposition because, while I mean no disrespect to Mr. Fraser, was he not the person responsible for the oversight of the Taoiseach's spin unit in the first place----------and central to its establishment? In no way could he be considered an independent assessor. It is, therefore, now time----------for the Taoiseach to wind down his strategic communications unit and I would go further-----Yes. The rules must be applied or misapplied in an even-handed manner, I am sure the Ceann Comhairle will agree.If the Ceann Comhairle does not mind, I will further put it to the Taoiseach that not alone should this unit be stood down, but he and any other relevant officials should go before the Committee of Public Accounts to give a full account----------of what was spent and how. These were, after all, public moneys and not Fine Gael moneys.I was very clear in my use of figures. I said it was a third of the additional moneys allocated for mental health.Five by three is 15. Those were the additional moneys. That is a very clear demonstration of the Taoiseach's political priorities. This unit, by his choice and by design, resides within his Department. It is simply not an explanation for him to say that agencies at an arm's length are the accountable ones in terms of the use or misuse of public moneys. It does not work that way. The Taoiseach is in charge, the unit is in his Department and he is answerable for the ethical and proper use and spending of those moneys. That is why I have made the point that the Taoiseach and the officials associated with the unit need now to give a full and transparent account of what was spent and how it was spent.Let me make this point also.In the midst of all of this has been a very clear tactic on the Taoiseach's part, or officials or agencies on his behalf, to exploit the financial situation of regional media. That is not lost on people either.The approach has been cynical. It has been underhand. The Taoiseach needs to stand this unit down and answer also the issue I raised with him on the Secretary General of his party - or of his Department, a Freudian slip perhaps - actually carrying out this independent review.It is certainly not independent in that regard.Martin Fraser, as I said earlier, is a person I know well and for whom I have great respect. Let me say this.It is not me who has acted to compromise the position of a senior civil servant. That has been the action of the Government and the Taoiseach himself."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-02-28	---	1	The European Union has this afternoon published the draft of its Brexit withdrawal agreement. We have only had sight of the text in the past 45 minutes and we will have to study the precise detail in the coming hours. However, having scanned the draft document, I welcome that the European Union now explicitly accepts that special arrangements are required for the North. As the Taoiseach knows, since the Brexit referendum, Sinn Féin has argued consistently and vigorously for the North to be designated special status within the European Union. We stated this was the only way to avoid the imposition of a hard border on this island and ensure the all-island economy and peace agreements are protected. Special status means the North remaining inside the customs union and Single Market. We now have a draft text that recognises that the North must stay in the customs union and I welcome that recognition. I also voice concern at any prospect of the North exiting the Single Market and concerns remain for east-west trade and commerce.As the Taoiseach knows, the British Government and Brexiteers engaged in their Brexit debate with zero regard for the impact on Ireland. They showed no concern for our economy, the rights of our people or the peace process. They now want to conclude their debate and make their exit by putting the Good Friday Agreement through the shredder. The Tory-DUP axis is satisfied to treat the welfare of the people of this island as collateral damage so long as it can achieve a little Englander Brexit. Its arrogance is best highlighted by the rejection of the vote of the people of the North to remain in the European Union and crystallised most recently in the juvenile and dangerous commentary of the British Foreign Secretary, Boris Johnson.The DUP has explicitly hitched itself to the Tory wagon. It has put narrow political interests ahead of the good of the people of the North from all communities, our economic well-being and the political process. The position of the Tory-DUP Brexiteers is that they want Brexit at any cost. However, they will not foot the bill. Rather, it will be the ordinary people of this island, North and South, who foot the bill and that cannot be allowed to happen. The Tory-DUP wrecking agenda cannot prevail. As Head of Government, it is the Taoiseach's job to ensure this does not happen. There is no doubt in my mind that the British Government will attempt to undermine the text of the draft agreement in the time ahead. In the context of the DUP's collapsing of the talks in the North, I asked that the Taoiseach convene the British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference. Today's development adds weight to the need for this to be done. Will the Taoiseach convene the intergovernmental conference?The Taoiseach will recognise, as I do, that the rhetoric has changed for the worst substantially since last December and that the commitment made initially to no hard border and to protecting the agreement in all its parts has come unstuck because the reality is that members of the Tory Government are openly speculating that the agreement is past its sell-by date and that a hard border is not only necessary but, indeed, desirable to achieve the kind of Brexit they require. It would be remiss of us, and it would be remiss of the Taoiseach as Head of Government, to miss those clear soundings.The best methodology to provide a backstop to protect the island as a whole and to protect the agreement is the convening of the intergovernmental conference. The Taoiseach has stalled on his response to that. In the absence of that, how does the Taoiseach propose to engage the British Government and the British system to ensure we get back to a position of unanimity regarding no border at all on the island of Ireland, and respect and protection for the agreement?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-02-28	---	2	There was only one proposal put to the Taoiseach yesterday in respect of the cold weather and our elderly and vulnerable citizens, which is that the Government would pay a double week of the fuel allowance. Nobody on this side of the House gave advice to the elderly to leave heating on 24-7. In fairness to the Minister of State, Deputy Jim Daly, when he said that I took it that he meant it as a reassurance or an encouragement to older people to keep themselves warm. The Taoiseach is being a little disingenuous and unfair to the Minister of State in suggesting that it was a concrete proposal to have heating on 24-7. The public heard it in a different way. In any case, I am glad the Taoiseach has agreed to that measure, that measure being the double fuel allowance not the heating on 24-7. Can he clarify-----The Deputy is absolutely hilarious. I am sure people who are cold in their homes are only rolling around laughing at him. He really is a comic.Can the Taoiseach confirm the date of the payment of the double week? That was not clear from the Minister, Deputy Regina Doherty's, announcement. Is it 12 March? Will the recipients who receive the allowance in two lump sums also be included in the payment?And Deputy Ross.Apparently not.
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-02-27	---	1	Follow that, as they say.In this very important week, I want to raise the issue of Brexit. Tomorrow and the next day, we will see the text that will give effect to the agreement struck between the European Union and the British Government last December. The Taoiseach will recall that at the time of its publication we acknowledged some political progress had been made. However, we raised a series of contradictions inherent in that agreement at the time and I want to place them again on the record of the House.The first contradiction was the claim there would be no hard border on the island of Ireland but yet the North would be taken out of the customs union and the Single Market. The second contradiction was the assertion there would be no threat to the Good Friday Agreement against the fact that there are 142 areas of all-Ireland co-operation that could be adversely affected by Brexit. Contradiction number three was the claim there would be no erosion in the rights of citizens living in the North as against the fact the British are determined to withdraw from the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice.The fourth is that although the North voted to remain in the European Union, that decision has been set aside by the British Government, the DUP and others.In the conversion of December's political agreement into a legally binding withdrawal text, it is critical that these contradictions are resolved. That is the only way to achieve clarity and certainty for our people, the all-Ireland economy and for our agreements. That means the text must explicitly state that there will be no Brexit border on the island and the only way to guarantee this is by the North remaining inside the customs union and the Single Market. The text must explicitly protect the Good Friday Agreement in all its parts and it must make clear in substance that there will be no loss of rights for citizens. The Tánaiste met with Mr. Michel Barnier in Brussels yesterday and he has seen the draft legal text. He is quoted widely today as saying that he is more than satisfied that the Irish Government and the EU are of one mind on the draft text.Have those four contradictions been resolved? The Taoiseach said previously that this country cannot take a leap into the dark when dealing with matters connected with Brexit and I agree with him. Can the Taoiseach confirm, therefore, that the text we will see resolves all the issues I have set out and, in real terms, represents the legal protection and guarantees we need?Can I therefore assume that the text allows for the North remaining within the customs union and the Single Market or can I put such a direct question? I recall that last December the Taoiseach sought to assure people that the agreement struck was cast iron and watertight but in the days following the announcement it became abundantly clear that it was anything but.Doubt was shed as to the strength of the agreement. This is quite straightforward. To protect the Good Friday Agreement, as well as the livelihoods, jobs, commerce and the economy of the island, we need the North to remain within the customs union and the Single Market. Will the Taoiseach tell us directly whether the text we will see tomorrow allows, provides for and legally underpins that?
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-02-20	---	1	Permanent TSB may not yet have sold on any mortgages but we know it is preparing to sell 20,000 of them to vulture funds. Permanent TSB is a State-owned bank and the Minister for Finance is the majority shareholder. Let us not make any bones about it; these vulture funds are prepared to pick the bones of mortgage holders as and when it suits them. Their interest in the acquisition of these assets is purely short term and focused on turning a quick buck. They are unregulated, they are not governed by the Central Bank and they are not accountable to the Oireachtas. I do not know how the Taoiseach would feel if his home was turned over to a financial firm that does not have to abide by any rules. I know I would feel alone, afraid, abandoned and probably depressed. Allowing vulture funds to operate so recklessly is clearly Government policy, and I include Fianna Fáil in that context. We only have to look to the evidence. In 2015, the Government had a chance to ensure that vulnerable mortgage holders would have some level of protection. However, Fine Gael and the Labour Party refused to support Sinn Féin in making such vulture funds fully regulated. Fianna Fáil also failed to support that proposal. In fact, its Deputies did not even bother showing up for the vote.The hypocrisy today is odious as Fianna Fáil and the Taoiseach now pretend to champion the very people they helped feed to these vultures three years ago. I have a response to a parliamentary question submitted by Deputy Pearse Doherty which demonstrates that the former Minister for Finance, Deputy Noonan, and officials from the Department met representatives of vulture funds 60 times in less than two years. That is a serious level of access for the vulture funds. It only serves to emphasise the very cold shoulder and deaf ear that vulnerable mortgage holders have been given.It is time to be honest and clear. Deputies who oppose this sale and others are obliged to intervene. They must do so to prevent not just this sale but also others from proceeding. I urge the Taoiseach to do the right thing and spare people this nightmare. I am asking him to lift the phone to Permanent TSB and tell it that he and his Government will not permit the sale. I urge him to deal with the current situation. He might also support the legislation Sinn Féin has brought forward to protect homeowners affected by sales to vulture funds. How about this for an idea? Will the Taoiseach issue a direction to the banks and NAMA today that under no circumstances should any domestic mortgages be sold to any vulture fund, either now or in the future? Will he make that phone call? Will he support the legislation and will he issue that direction?It is also essential that holders of distressed mortgages are not put through further distress and perhaps rendered homeless, which would add to the crisis we are facing. The time for the Taoiseach to stand by the people and to make sure that we got the legislation right was in 2015. He is correct to say that the servicers of the mortgages - those companies hired by the vulture funds - are regulated, but the big gap in the legislation is that the funds themselves are footloose and fancy-free. The purpose of our amendment in 2015 was to set that right, but the Government chose to look the other way.The Taoiseach said that these loans have not yet been sold and that we still have time. I want clarity around what he proposes to do with that time. People need to hear that An Taoiseach and the Government will stand by mortgage holders, families and people who have already been through a very testing nightmare scenario. I want to hear that as well. What will the Minister say when Permanent TSB contacts the Minister? Will the Minister tell it that under no circumstances can this sale go ahead? Is the Taoiseach prepared, in the common interest - in the interests of citizens and not balance sheets - to issue the directive as suggested? The big dilemma now is that, by definition, the interests of vulture funds in these mortgages is short term. Distressed mortgage holders - in fact, any holder of a mortgage - enters into a long-term contract that can hit bumps in the road. That is the reality, and everybody here knows it. I believe the Taoiseach must act. Rather than sounding a concerned note, he needs to be more substantive in his reply.I thank him for his good wishes on my election as Uachtarán Sinn Féin
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-01-18	---	1	"People who are being discriminated against under the current State pension provisions will protest outside Leinster House again this afternoon. The Minister is probably aware that this issue affects approximately 40,000 citizens who are campaigning for the full restoration of their pension entitlements. They want a full rather than a partial solution. Some of them are out of pocket to the tune of €30 a week as a result of the changes introduced in 2012. As the Minister knows, this discrimination disproportionately affects women and is a direct result of measures introduced by Fine Gael and its Labour Party partners when they were in government in 2012. Deputy Joan Burton's changes have made it extremely difficult for women who exited the workforce, perhaps to raise children or attend to other caring duties, before returning to employment later in life to qualify for the maximum payment. I cite women as an example because they are affected disproportionately, but I am conscious that the changes also hurt some men. This discrimination did not happen by accident. It was not an oversight or a mistake. The Government of the day made the changes in the full knowledge of the impact they would have on these citizens and the disproportionate effect it would have on women.Sinn Féin has been calling on the Government for some time to sort out this matter. A motion we proposed in the Dáil in December 2016 to address this injustice was rejected by Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil. The alternative budget we published in October 2017 showed the Government how funding could be provided to rectify and correct this discrimination, but, again, it was rejected by the Government. We raised this matter during Leaders' Questions on a number of occasions before Christmas. Every time we have proposed solutions to this problem we have received evasive and non-committal responses from the Government. Time and again, it has chosen not to do right by the people affected.It has emerged that the Government is now considering partial restoration. I understand the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection, Deputy Regina Doherty, has acknowledged that the citizens mentioned have been wronged and vowed to fix this anomaly. However, she has expressed the view that something magical will have to happen if the money is to be found. I remind the House that the Government infamously conjured up €5 million to fund a strategic communications unit as the Taoiseach's vanity project. It was able to find enough financial space to introduce tax cuts which disproportionately benefited the well off. Now it is telling us that financial wizardry would be required to find €70 million to correct an injustice perpetrated against 40,000 people. The people who will protest at the gates of Leinster House today are telling us loudly and clearly that they will not accept being treated as second-class citizens any longer. The Government's job is to find a solution for them. Comforting words and expressions of sympathy are not enough because a solution is needed. Will the Minister tell the people standing at the gates of Leinster House that the Government will provide the €70 million in funding needed to enable them finally to receive their full entitlements?I thank the Minister for that answer. I do not for one second deny the complexities involved in pensions policy, provision and reform. I am not challenging that, but the Minister needs to understand the absolute simplicity of the case being made by those who are gathering at the gates of Leinster House. The simple fact is that the changes introduced when Fine Gael was in government in 2012 are costing approximately 40,000 citizens as much as €30 a week in some cases. That is a lot of money for people on limited incomes.Deputy Brady informs me that the paper of which the Minister spoke will be presented to a Cabinet committee today and is due before the full Cabinet next Tuesday. Will the Government provide the €70 million required to correct this matter? I would like a straight ""Yes"" or ""No"" answer to that question. I ask the Minister not to hide behind other anomalies or quirks in the system that need to be dealt with or use them as an excuse for not doing right by the people concerned. The Government must show us the money to make this right.I will take the Minister's reply as a ""No""."
Mary Lou McDonald	Sinn Féin	49	Dublin Central	question	2018-01-18	---	2	Several of the Minister's colleagues have signalled a review of the local property tax, LPT, including the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, this morning. We had advised Government from the outset that the local property tax was not a progressive but a punitive tax on the family home. It seems the penny has dropped as property prices and home values are rising not least in Dublin. The Government should be abolishing this tax. As it seems it will not do that can the Minister tell me when this promised review will be completed and will it require any legislative change?
